[
(without calling upon Counsel for the Respondents).

LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: I will ask Lord Justice Pearce to deliver the first Judgment.

LORD JUSTICE PEARCE: The Plaintiff appeals
from a Judgment of Mr. Justice Donovan given at the York Assizes on the
14th June, 1957, dismissing the Plaintiff's claim for damages for
personal injury suffered in an accident sustained by him when he was
working for the Defendants as a window cleaner. The Plaintiff alleged
negligence against the Defendants. The Defendants denied negligence but
made no allegation of contributory negligence. The learned Judge
assessed the damages, in case of appeal, at Â£4,320. The Plaintiff was a
man of 56 at the time of the accident. He had been a window cleaner all
his working life, and was a trained and very experienced man in that
occupation. Ha had worked for the Defendants for 13 or 14 years. He had
been a charge-hand with his previous employers, and acted in that
capacity with the Defendants when he was needed to do so. He had taught
many hundreds of persons how to carry on their trade.

The Defendant firm had. been in existence for 60
years, employing at times up to fifty men, and so far as accidents were
concerned had apparently a good record. The Defendants had a contract
to clean the windows of the Newcastle Breweries once a quarter, a task
which took two men three or four days. The Plaintiff had done work on
the breweries frequently in the last ten years before the accident.
There was no inspection of the premises before the starting of the
work. On the 3rd September, 1954* the Plaintiff and another man went to
perform the quarterly cleaning. In due course the Plaintiff cleaned the
window with which this case is concerned. It la 12 ft. from the ground;
it overlooks a street with a rather steep incline. He had cleaned that
same window three months before and on other previous occasions. There
had originally been handles on each side of the underneath of the upper
sash, but for soma two or three years there had been only one handle
remaining, namely, that on the right hand side. The room to which the
window belonged was a kitchen. The steam condensed and ran down,
causing the woodwork to rot. To the Plaintiff it appeared "all rotten",
to use his own words; and he said that the sash was always a bit stiff.
The Plaintiff first cleaned the window from the inside. Then he put up
his 28 ft. extending ladder and wedged it firmly on the ground.
Standing on the ladder, ho cleaned the bottom half first. Then ha took
hold of the handle with his right hand and put the fingers of hie left
hand over the putty en the bottom bar of the top sash, in order to pull
the sash down. He had so used that handle three months before and en
previous occasions. He gave a pull on the handle. It came away in his
hand, so that he lost balance and fell off the ladder, suffering severe
injuries. The learned Judge found that ha gave a pull of sufficient
strength to bring the top half of the window down had the handle
remained firm. The Appellant complaints of that finding as putting the
strength of the pull toe high. But the learned Judge took into account
the fact that the pull was enough to throw the Plaintiff off balance;
and it seems to me that it was a reasonable finding, en the evidence.

When the Plaintiff went to work for the Defendants
he knew that ha should not trust handles on windows but he had never
himself experienced the coming off of a handle. The Defendants had
never given him general safety instructions, or said anything to him
specifically about handles. But in answer to the Judge's question "When
you first went to this company if someone had said to you 'Never trust
handles on windows' would that have been something you knew already?*,
the Plaintiff said "Something I knew already". The learned Judge
describes the extent of the Plaintiff 'a knowledge and information in
these words: "If in the course of his work the Plaintiff came across a
window the cleaning of which presented some unusual difficulty, and the
Plaintiff was in doubt whether he could clean it safely, then the
system was that be should leave the window uncleaned, report the fact
to the Defendants, and ask for further instructions. He was told to do
this when he first joined the Defendant firm in 1942. Mr. Waller says
that to call that a system was putting the matter higher than the
evidence justified. But I do not think that that criticism is made out.

Then the learned Judge continued: 
"The Plaintiff had cleaned this
particular window many times previously himself, the last occasion
being the June before the September when he met with his accident. In
that June, he had pulled the top half of this window down all right
despite the missing handle, though the window was always a bit stiff to
move. He knew that the window had had only one handle for years, and,
as already mentioned, he saw that the state of the woodwork of the
window was rotten. He knew from experience that one should not trust to
handles en windows, that is, that he should not pull on them under any
circumstances in which, if the handle gave way, he would run the risk
of injury. He knew that he should test the handle first. No general
instructions were given to him when he joined the Defendants as to how
he should clean windows. He already knew. No warning against using
window handles as handholds lest they should give way was given to him,
but ho was already aware of this danger. He had cleaned very many
windows having handles similar to the one in the present case: such
handles were common in the Newcastle district, and, while one had never
come off before while ha was holding it, he was aware of the
possibility that one might -- 'I knew all along' ha said 'that one
should not trust to handles'". .

There was evidence that handles coming off are
frequent causes of accidents. Mr. Davis, a surveyor called for the
Plaintiff, made four criticisms of the Defendants' behaviour. First, he
said that there ought to be printed rules; and he produced a booklet
which set out clearly what are the perils and what matters should be
avoided. Me said that that booklet ought to be given to the employees
and that they should be made to sign a document to say that they had
read it, because although they might be aware of the warnings contained
in it it was necessary to drive those warnings home. Secondly, he said
that the men should he told that where there was only one handle
remaining en an upper sash, the sash should he opened from the inside.
Thirdly, he recommended regular visits, say once or twice a year, by
someone in authority, to see that the employees were doing their work
properly and that all was going well - that being chiefly designed to
impress on them the importance of obeying safety rules* He admitted
that there was a field where you had to leave it to the men to find
defects and report. He had no knowledge of what the practice is in the
window-cleaning trade; and he had no knowledge of preliminary
inspections being made before the men worked on a particular job; but
he had heard of people coming round as overseers to see that the work
was being properly done. Now the learned Judge's findings of fact are
not seriously challenged. There are four minor criticisms, two of which
I have mentioned, where Mr. Waller says that the learned Judge gave a
wrong emphasis to the evidence. I do not think that any valid
criticisms of the learned Judge's findings of fact have been made out.
In a long and careful Judgment, he dealt with all the relevant facts
and all the contentions put forward by the Plaintiff. Mr. Waller, in
his very fair and careful argument for the Appellant, bases his
contentions on two main grounds: first, that it is the duty of the
Defendants to provide a place of work as safe as reasonable care and
skill can make it. The accident (he says) shows that this place of work
was not safe. That duty is always on the Defendants, whether delegated
or not, as is shown by the case (in particular) of Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company Limited v. English (1938 Appeal Cases, page 37).  He relies on Biddle v. Hart (1907 1 King's Bench, page 649) and on a dictum of Lord Justice Denning in Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited
(1952 1 All England. Reports, page 39), as showing that the employer's
duty of care as to the safety of the place of work extends even to
premises over which he has no control; and he argues that the decisions
in Taylor v. Sims & Sims (1942 2 All England Reports, page 373) and Cilia v. H.M. James & Sena
(1954 1 Weekly Law Reports, page 721) are wrong in so far as a contrary
view was taken. On the basis that the responsibility for providing a
safe place of work remains on the master even though ha has no control
of the premises, Mr. Waller contends that at the least a preliminary
inspection to ascertain the dangers is available to the master and that
in this case the Defendants were negligent in not so inspecting and in
not providing a safe place of work for the Plaintiff.

Further, in respect of premises out of the master's
control Mr. Waller argues that the duty of providing safe premises if
it were, delegated by the master to the occupier. The master is thus
vicariously liable for the occupier's failure to provide safe premises.
It is true that, if one can import such a notional delegation, that
further argument would stand. But such a delegation necessitates a
fiction which seems to me to have no justification in fact. The
tradesman comes to the premises to do something to them. He does not
thereby delegate to the owner something which he himself has no right
to do and with which he has never been concerned.

Mr. Waller's second point, as additional or
alternative, is that the Defendants failed in their duty to take steps
to provide a system which would protect the Plaintiff from the danger
which caused his accident. A proper system (in his contention) would
necessitate first an instruction to the Plaintiff that a window with
only one handle must be opened from inside: secondly, a regular
inspection by an overseer to see how the work was going and to
emphasise the necessity for safety precautions: thirdly, a specific
warning of the danger of trusting to handles on windows, a warning
which should be repeated say twice a year, even though the danger was
known to the Plaintiff â Mr. Waller instanced certain railway
regulations that, though known to the men, have to be read to them
twice a year as a reminder of things which, though well-known, are apt
to escape their attention or to be treated lightly â and fourthly, that
the master should have told the occupier to put the premises in order.

The learned Judge dealt with the first contention
(as to the duty to provide a safe place of work) as follows. First he
reminded himself of the well-known dictum of Lord Herschell in Smith v. Baker
-- that the duty of the employer is to take reasonable care to provide
proper appliances and to maintain them in proper condition and so to
carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by him to
unnecessary risk. He dealt with the passage in the Judgment of Lord
Justice Denning in the window-cleaning case of Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited,
to which I have referred. That passage reads as follows: "The next
question is whether the contractors are liable to their workman, the
plaintiff. Counsel for the contractors argued that employers who send
their men out to work on the premises of other people have no
responsibility for the safety of those premises. Be cited Taylor v. Sims & Sims
in support of that proposition. He said that it was for the occupier to
see that the premises were safe for the workman and not for the
employer to do so. I cannot agree with that proposition. Until recently
many people thought that an occupier was bound to use reasonable care
to see that his premises were safe for workmen he invited on them, but
that is no longer true. The decision of the House of Lords in London Graving Dock Company Limited v. Horton
shows that an occupier can allow his premises to remain defective and
dangerous with impunity so long as he gives the men warning that the
risk or the danger is so obvious that they must be aware of it. If this
is so, I think it must follow that it is for the employer, who sends
his men to the premises, to take reasonable care to see that the
premises are safe for the men, or else take proper steps to protect the
men from the dangers to which he sends them.

The learned Lord Justice was in effect saying that Horton's case
had left a gap which must be filled by imposing on the employer a
liability for dangers for which the invitor might no longer be liable.
The learned Judge observed that the other members of the Court of
Appeal had based their Judgments on somewhat different grounds and that
in the House of Lords the decision in the Plaintiff's favour was based
on a shortcoming in the system employed to clean the windows rather
than a failure to inspect the windows before each periodical cleaning.
He then referred to Cilia v. James & Sons and. Taylor v. Sims & Sims,
in each of which cases the learned Judges held that where an employer
sent out his men to work on the premises of others there was no duty of
care on him in respect of those premises and that, if there were, the
duty had, on the particular facts of each case, been discharged. He
also referred to Hodgson v. British Arc Welding Company Limited
(1946 King's Bench, page 302), in which Mr. Justice Hilbery dealt with
a similar point in a somewhat different and, as it seems to me, a
preferable way. The implications of his Judgment are' not that the
employers had no duty at all in respect of things over which they had
no control but that the discharge of that duty was of a wholly
different kind from that where the master was in control.

The learned Judge then continued as follows: 
"There is no evidence before
me of any practice of window cleaning employers to inspect premises in
detail before each periodical cleaning of the windows. Nor would Mr.
Davis â a surveyor called for the Plaintiff â go further than to say
that employers should go around while the work was on 'to keep an eye
on the men and see how the job was shaping'. I think it would be
placing too heavy a burden upon employers to say that they must inspect
in detail all the premises where their men clean windows every time the
men do so and before they do so. Some premises contain so many windows
that before the last window was inspected some new defect might have
developed in the first; for example, a broken sash-cord, and the work
of inspection might be endless. And without in any way minimising the
risks of the job, I think they can be met in other ways. If men are
properly taught their job; are provided with proper equipment; are
adequately warned of the dangers, and are instructed that they should
not clean any windows which appear to them to be too dangerous to
clean, but should report the matter back to the employer, then it seems
to me to be unnecessary to lay down that the employer must in addition
inspect every window beforehand".

The learned Judge then went on to deal with the case of Thomson v. Cremin
(1953 2 All England Reports, page 1185) on which the Plaintiff relied
before him and relies before us. In that case a stevedore succeeded
against a shipowner, as invitor, in respect of a faulty shoring that
injured the Plaintiff. The shoring had been installed by competent
shipwrights in Australia who were independent contractors, and a
Government certificate, had been issued to the effect that the
regulations had been duly complied with. The shipowner, on the same
reasoning as that in Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company v. English,
was held vicariously liable to an invitee for the default of the
independent contractors. The Plaintiff in this ease sought to say that
since a master owes an even higher duty to a servant than an invitor to
an invitee, then a master must a fortiori owe a duty to a
servant to see that the premises are safe before sending his workman to
work on someone else's premises. But, as the learned Judge pointed out,
this vary argument had failed in that case, since the plaintiff had
sued his master as wall as the shipowner but had failed against his
master,. The learned Judge referred to the words of Lord Simon and Lord
Wright in that case. Lord Simon said: 
"Rare, again, I agree with the
view of the Scottish courts that it was not proved to be part of the
regular practice or course of duty of stevedoring firms to make such
inspection".

The learned Judge then dealt with the duty to make
this particular handle safe, and concluded that since it was not within
the power of the Defendants to do so and they had net the necessary
control over the premises it could hardly be unreasonable not to do so.
He concluded, on this point, 
"The Defendants in fact met
the situation in this case by telling the Plaintiff, a very experienced
man, that he need clean no window which he considered unsafe. I hold
that there was no obligation upon the Defendants to go further and make
good the defective handle. The duty of an employer to take reasonable
care to provide a safe place of work relates, in my view, only to that
place of work which is in the employer's occupation or over which he is
shown to have the necessary degree of control. This is not true of the
premises in the present case".

The learned Judge then dealt with the Defendants'
alleged failure to warn the Plaintiff of that which he already knew,
namely, the danger of pulling on handles, and with the failure to give
periodically repeated warnings in order to keep his caution vigilant,
and decided that there was no negligent failure in that respect. He
commented on the fact that there was no evidence of any practice in the
trade with regard to repeated warnings. He differentiated between this
case and cases where risks are "insidious and unseen", such as
dermatitis eases, where, for instance, it might be that reminders as to
the use of barrier cream and such like precautions were necessary; and
he pointed out that in any event it was pure guesswork as to whether,
if there had been periodic warnings, this accident would have been
avoided. He found, therefore, that the Defendants had not been
negligent.

Now it is true that in Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company v. English,
Lord Wright divided up the duty of a master into three main headings,
for convenience of definition or argument; but all three are ultimately
only manifestations of the same duty of the master to take reasonable
care so to carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by
him to unnecessary risk. Whether the servant is working on the premises
of the master or those of a stranger, that duty is still, as it seems
to me, the same; but as a matter of common sense its performance and
discharge will probably be vastly different in the two cases. The
master's own premises are under his control: if they are dangerously in
need of repair he can and must rectify the fault at once if he is to
escape the censure of negligence. But if a master sends his plumber to
mend a leak in a, respectable private house, no one could hold him
negligent for not visiting the house himself to see if the carpet in
the hall creates a trap. Between those extremes are countless possible
examples in which the Court may have to decide the question of fact:
Did the master take reasonable care so to carry out his operations as
not to subject those employed by him to unnecessary risk? Precautions
dictated by reasonable care when the servant works on the master's
premises may be wholly prevented or greatly circumscribed by the fact
that the place of work is under the control of a stranger. Additional
safeguards intended to reinforce the man's own knowledge and skill in
surmounting difficulties or dangers may be reasonable in the former
case but impracticable and unreasonable in the latter, So viewed, the
question whether the master was in control of the premises ceases to be
a matter of technicality and becomes merely one of the ingredients,
albeit a very important one, in a consideration of the question of fact
whether, in all the circumstances, the master took reasonable steps.

That, as it seems to me, is the reasoning of this Court in Biddle v. Hart
(1907 1 King's Bench, page 649). In that case a stevedore's workman,
whilst engaged in unloading a ship, was injured owing to a defect in
the tackle, and he was suing his master. The learned Judge withdrew the
case from the jury, on the ground that the stevedore was not
responsible for a defect in the ship's tackle because the tackle did
not belong to him. Lord Scroll said: 
"In my opinion, if the
employer uses plant which is net his own for the purpose of doing
something which he has engaged to do, it cannot possibly be said that
he has no duty whatever in relation to that plant. Otherwise he would
be able to take anything that came from anybody and to use anything in
the work he was engaged upon without making any inquiry at all, and
then say, in the event of an injury arising from a defect in the plant,
that he had nothing to do with it, and so escape liability. That, to my
mind, is unreasonable, and is not consistent with the second section.
What I take to be the meaning of that is that if the employer uses
plant which does not belong to him, he may have a duty in regard to the
persons employed to take reasonable care to see that it is proper for
the purpose for which it is need. It may be that in a case of this
character, although he had that duty, yet, if he had dealt with these
shipowners before and had never had any cause for complaint, the jury
might think that he had reasonably discharged that duty. On the other
hand, when you have evidence that the plant was old and had been in use
for a long time, the jury might say they ware not satisfied that
reasonable care had been taken to see that it was in a proper
condition. Once establish the duty the question la, What would the jury
consider a discharge of that duty?".

As Lord Justice Parker pointed out in Davie v. New Merton Board Mills
(1958 1 All England Reports, page 67), that reasoning seems
inconsistent with the two decisions to which I have referred which say
that there is no duty of care in respect of premises over which the
master has no control, but it is consistent with the alternative ratio
in each ease that the duty had been discharged. It is consistent, I
think, with the implications of the Judgment of Mr. Justice Hilbery in Hodgson v. British Arc Welding Company Limited.
But applying that reasoning to this case, I think that the Plaintiff
has not shown that the Defendants failed to take reasonable steps for
the safety of the Plaintiff.

The learned Judge's reasoning seems to me to be
sound. It was a question of fact whether the Defendants were negligent;
and I see no ground for differing from the conclusions of fact which
the learned Judge reached.

I would dismiss the appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE PARKER: I agree.

I have no doubt that this appeal fails. It is only
out of respect for Mr. Waller's persuasive argument that I add
anything. The first way in which he puts his case is this. It is, he
says, the master's duty to provide a place of employment as safe as the
exercise of reasonable skill and cars will permit. Quite clearly, the
premises in this case where the Plaintiff was to work were not as safe
as the exercise of reasonable skill and care would permit: therefore as
the duty is personal the Defendants are liable; and that is so whether
the premises are in the occupation of the Defendants or (as here) of
people who are neither servants nor agents, nor independent contractors
employed by the Defendants.

I think that this ease is a very good example of
the difficulties that one gets into in treating the duty owed at Common
Law by a master to his servant as a number of separate duties. Thus, it
is often said (as it is said in this case) that the master owes a duty
to make the place of employment as safe as reasonable skill and care
will permit. Again, it is said that it is the master's duty to make the
plant and tools as safe as reasonable skill and care will permit; and
again it is said that it is the master's duty to devise and lay down a
safe system of working.

Approached in that way, questions at once arise as
to whether, and if so to what extent, any of those duties extend (in
the case of premises) to premises not occupied or controlled by the
master, or (in the case of plant and tools) to plant and tools bought
from responsible and reputable suppliers or manufacturers - bearing in
mind, as has been laid down so often, that in each case the duty is a
duty personal to the employer, in the sense used in Wilsons'
case. It is no doubt convenient, when one is dealing with any
particular case, to divide that duty into a number of categories; but
for myself I prefer to consider the master's duty as one applicable in
all circumstances, namely, to take reasonable care for the safety of
his men, or, as Lord Herschell said in the well-known passage in Smith v. Baker, to take reasonable care so to carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by him to unnecessary risk.

That general duty applies in the circumstances of
every case; but the governing words "reasonable care" limit the extent
of the duty in the circumstances of each case. Accordingly the duty is
there, whether the premises on which the workman is employed are in the
occupation of the master or of a third party, or whether the tool has
been made to the order of the master or his manager, servant or agent,
or is a standard tool supplied and manufactured by reputable third
parties; but what reasonable care demands in each case will no doubt
vary.

That, as it seems to me, is the true principle, and is consistent with the decision of this Court in Biddle v. Hart (1907 1 King's Bench, page 649). As I said in Davie v. New Merton Board Mills, I very much doubt whether the decisions in Taylor v. Sims & Sims and Cilia v. James & Sons
are correct decisions in so far as they said that in circumstances such
as these there is no duty in respect of the safety of the promises. It
seems to me also that those statements are inconsistent with a passage
in the Speech of Lord Wright in Thomson v. Cremin (1953 2 All England Reports, page 1185), the passage being at page 1192).

Mr. Waller relied strongly on the dicta of Lord Justice Denning in the case of Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited
(1952 1 King's Bench at Page 148); but in my judgment those were dicta,
and in so far as Mr. Waller said that those remarks implied that there
was a duty to make promises in the occupation of a third party safe I
do not think that they can stand with the decisions to which I have
referred* Bearing that in mind, it seems to me that there is nothing in
this case on which one can say that the general duty, so far as it
relates to premises, has been broken.

One can conceive cases of a very old, dilapidated
building, or a building which is known to have suffered war damage or
is dilapidated in some other respect, where one could say that it was
the duty of an employer to see that it was made safe or, if it could
not be made safe, if necessary to forbid his workmen to go there and
work. But there is no suggestion of that in the present case.

So much for Mr. Waller's first contention. His
second contention is based on an allegation that in various respects
there has been a breach of the sub-division of the duty which relates
to an unsafe system of working. I think this must be right: that in so
far as what one may call the first division, the making the premises
sage, cannot be fully performed â as when they are in the possession of
a third party, it behoves the master to exercise all the more care in
regard to his system of working.

In regard to the system of working, various points
are taken. It is said firstly that it was the duty of the master,
albeit that he could not make the premises safe, to inspect them either
each time the workmen went on the job or at any rate twice a year in
the course of a contract such as this. That, of course, overlaps to
some extent what I have already said in regard to the first contention;
but in so far as it is based on an unsafe system of working it seems to
me that the answer here is that there is no suggestion that there is
any practice in the trade in that regard. No doubt a master will
inspect the premises generally with a view to estimating for the job in
the first instance; but there is no practice in the trade whereby he
must make a periodic inspection.

Secondly, it is said that reasonable care demanded
in this case that there should be repeated warnings given to the
Plaintiff of the danger of windows sticking and of handles coming off.
In fact in the present case there not only has been no repeated
warning, but no initial warning. But the circumstances here are these:
this is a man who was 56 years of age, I think, at the time, and who
has been all his life a window cleaner: he is a very experienced man,
usually acting as a charge-hand, and he knew â and he frankly said that
he knew â of the dangers involved, of handles coming off. It is said
that he should have been told - one witness suggested that it should be
impressed upon him twice a year â again and again. For my part, I would
like to adopt entirely what Mr. Justice Donovan said on that point. It
seems to me that the disadvantages of doing that in the case of skilled
men of this sort may well outweigh the advantages; and for my part I
cannot think that "reasonable care" demands a repeated warning to
skilled man in a case at any rate such as this, where the dangers
involved are patent. It is not a case that one sometimes comes across
of the danger of silicosis from particles of dust which are quite
invisible and cannot be seen. I do not know, but it may well be that in
such cases "reasonable care" would demand that the employer should warn
and exhort the men constantly to wear masks. But there, as I have said,
the danger is not patent.

Lastly, it is said (and for my part I think that
this is the strongest way that Mr. Waller can put his case) that there
ought to have been general instructions that in the case of all sash
windows men should clean them from the inside first and, while inside,
should see that the top sash will come down - in other words, that it
is not stuck; and that in the case of a window the handles of which are
suspect it is actually opened while the men are inside. That, however,
was a suggestion made by only one witness, who I do not think had any
experience of window cleaning whatsoever. There is no suggestion that
there is any settled practice in the trade for the giving of such
instructions. Accordingly, one would have to say (adopting the words so
often used) that it would have bean folly on the part of a prudent
employer not to give such instructions. For my part, I am quite unable
to say that in that regard the Plaintiff has made out his case.

For these reasons, as well as the reasons given by my Lord, I would dismiss this appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: I entirely agree, and find nothing I can usefully add.

(Appeal dismissed: no Order as to costs save that Appellant's costs be taxed under Legal Aid and Advice Act).


]
[
(without calling upon Counsel for the Respondents).

LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: I will ask Lord Justice Pearce to deliver the first Judgment.

LORD JUSTICE PEARCE: The Plaintiff appeals
from a Judgment of Mr. Justice Donovan given at the York Assizes on the
14th June, 1957, dismissing the Plaintiff's claim for damages for
personal injury suffered in an accident sustained by him when he was
working for the Defendants as a window cleaner. The Plaintiff alleged
negligence against the Defendants. The Defendants denied negligence but
made no allegation of contributory negligence. The learned Judge
assessed the damages, in case of appeal, at Â£4,320. The Plaintiff was a
man of 56 at the time of the accident. He had been a window cleaner all
his working life, and was a trained and very experienced man in that
occupation. Ha had worked for the Defendants for 13 or 14 years. He had
been a charge-hand with his previous employers, and acted in that
capacity with the Defendants when he was needed to do so. He had taught
many hundreds of persons how to carry on their trade.

The Defendant firm had. been in existence for 60
years, employing at times up to fifty men, and so far as accidents were
concerned had apparently a good record. The Defendants had a contract
to clean the windows of the Newcastle Breweries once a quarter, a task
which took two men three or four days. The Plaintiff had done work on
the breweries frequently in the last ten years before the accident.
There was no inspection of the premises before the starting of the
work. On the 3rd September, 1954* the Plaintiff and another man went to
perform the quarterly cleaning. In due course the Plaintiff cleaned the
window with which this case is concerned. It la 12 ft. from the ground;
it overlooks a street with a rather steep incline. He had cleaned that
same window three months before and on other previous occasions. There
had originally been handles on each side of the underneath of the upper
sash, but for soma two or three years there had been only one handle
remaining, namely, that on the right hand side. The room to which the
window belonged was a kitchen. The steam condensed and ran down,
causing the woodwork to rot. To the Plaintiff it appeared "all rotten",
to use his own words; and he said that the sash was always a bit stiff.
The Plaintiff first cleaned the window from the inside. Then he put up
his 28 ft. extending ladder and wedged it firmly on the ground.
Standing on the ladder, ho cleaned the bottom half first. Then ha took
hold of the handle with his right hand and put the fingers of hie left
hand over the putty en the bottom bar of the top sash, in order to pull
the sash down. He had so used that handle three months before and en
previous occasions. He gave a pull on the handle. It came away in his
hand, so that he lost balance and fell off the ladder, suffering severe
injuries. The learned Judge found that ha gave a pull of sufficient
strength to bring the top half of the window down had the handle
remained firm. The Appellant complaints of that finding as putting the
strength of the pull toe high. But the learned Judge took into account
the fact that the pull was enough to throw the Plaintiff off balance;
and it seems to me that it was a reasonable finding, en the evidence.

When the Plaintiff went to work for the Defendants
he knew that ha should not trust handles on windows but he had never
himself experienced the coming off of a handle. The Defendants had
never given him general safety instructions, or said anything to him
specifically about handles. But in answer to the Judge's question "When
you first went to this company if someone had said to you 'Never trust
handles on windows' would that have been something you knew already?*,
the Plaintiff said "Something I knew already". The learned Judge
describes the extent of the Plaintiff 'a knowledge and information in
these words: "If in the course of his work the Plaintiff came across a
window the cleaning of which presented some unusual difficulty, and the
Plaintiff was in doubt whether he could clean it safely, then the
system was that be should leave the window uncleaned, report the fact
to the Defendants, and ask for further instructions. He was told to do
this when he first joined the Defendant firm in 1942. Mr. Waller says
that to call that a system was putting the matter higher than the
evidence justified. But I do not think that that criticism is made out.

Then the learned Judge continued: 
"The Plaintiff had cleaned this
particular window many times previously himself, the last occasion
being the June before the September when he met with his accident. In
that June, he had pulled the top half of this window down all right
despite the missing handle, though the window was always a bit stiff to
move. He knew that the window had had only one handle for years, and,
as already mentioned, he saw that the state of the woodwork of the
window was rotten. He knew from experience that one should not trust to
handles en windows, that is, that he should not pull on them under any
circumstances in which, if the handle gave way, he would run the risk
of injury. He knew that he should test the handle first. No general
instructions were given to him when he joined the Defendants as to how
he should clean windows. He already knew. No warning against using
window handles as handholds lest they should give way was given to him,
but ho was already aware of this danger. He had cleaned very many
windows having handles similar to the one in the present case: such
handles were common in the Newcastle district, and, while one had never
come off before while ha was holding it, he was aware of the
possibility that one might -- 'I knew all along' ha said 'that one
should not trust to handles'". .

There was evidence that handles coming off are
frequent causes of accidents. Mr. Davis, a surveyor called for the
Plaintiff, made four criticisms of the Defendants' behaviour. First, he
said that there ought to be printed rules; and he produced a booklet
which set out clearly what are the perils and what matters should be
avoided. Me said that that booklet ought to be given to the employees
and that they should be made to sign a document to say that they had
read it, because although they might be aware of the warnings contained
in it it was necessary to drive those warnings home. Secondly, he said
that the men should he told that where there was only one handle
remaining en an upper sash, the sash should he opened from the inside.
Thirdly, he recommended regular visits, say once or twice a year, by
someone in authority, to see that the employees were doing their work
properly and that all was going well - that being chiefly designed to
impress on them the importance of obeying safety rules* He admitted
that there was a field where you had to leave it to the men to find
defects and report. He had no knowledge of what the practice is in the
window-cleaning trade; and he had no knowledge of preliminary
inspections being made before the men worked on a particular job; but
he had heard of people coming round as overseers to see that the work
was being properly done. Now the learned Judge's findings of fact are
not seriously challenged. There are four minor criticisms, two of which
I have mentioned, where Mr. Waller says that the learned Judge gave a
wrong emphasis to the evidence. I do not think that any valid
criticisms of the learned Judge's findings of fact have been made out.
In a long and careful Judgment, he dealt with all the relevant facts
and all the contentions put forward by the Plaintiff. Mr. Waller, in
his very fair and careful argument for the Appellant, bases his
contentions on two main grounds: first, that it is the duty of the
Defendants to provide a place of work as safe as reasonable care and
skill can make it. The accident (he says) shows that this place of work
was not safe. That duty is always on the Defendants, whether delegated
or not, as is shown by the case (in particular) of Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company Limited v. English (1938 Appeal Cases, page 37).  He relies on Biddle v. Hart (1907 1 King's Bench, page 649) and on a dictum of Lord Justice Denning in Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited
(1952 1 All England. Reports, page 39), as showing that the employer's
duty of care as to the safety of the place of work extends even to
premises over which he has no control; and he argues that the decisions
in Taylor v. Sims & Sims (1942 2 All England Reports, page 373) and Cilia v. H.M. James & Sena
(1954 1 Weekly Law Reports, page 721) are wrong in so far as a contrary
view was taken. On the basis that the responsibility for providing a
safe place of work remains on the master even though ha has no control
of the premises, Mr. Waller contends that at the least a preliminary
inspection to ascertain the dangers is available to the master and that
in this case the Defendants were negligent in not so inspecting and in
not providing a safe place of work for the Plaintiff.

Further, in respect of premises out of the master's
control Mr. Waller argues that the duty of providing safe premises if
it were, delegated by the master to the occupier. The master is thus
vicariously liable for the occupier's failure to provide safe premises.
It is true that, if one can import such a notional delegation, that
further argument would stand. But such a delegation necessitates a
fiction which seems to me to have no justification in fact. The
tradesman comes to the premises to do something to them. He does not
thereby delegate to the owner something which he himself has no right
to do and with which he has never been concerned.

Mr. Waller's second point, as additional or
alternative, is that the Defendants failed in their duty to take steps
to provide a system which would protect the Plaintiff from the danger
which caused his accident. A proper system (in his contention) would
necessitate first an instruction to the Plaintiff that a window with
only one handle must be opened from inside: secondly, a regular
inspection by an overseer to see how the work was going and to
emphasise the necessity for safety precautions: thirdly, a specific
warning of the danger of trusting to handles on windows, a warning
which should be repeated say twice a year, even though the danger was
known to the Plaintiff â Mr. Waller instanced certain railway
regulations that, though known to the men, have to be read to them
twice a year as a reminder of things which, though well-known, are apt
to escape their attention or to be treated lightly â and fourthly, that
the master should have told the occupier to put the premises in order.

The learned Judge dealt with the first contention
(as to the duty to provide a safe place of work) as follows. First he
reminded himself of the well-known dictum of Lord Herschell in Smith v. Baker
-- that the duty of the employer is to take reasonable care to provide
proper appliances and to maintain them in proper condition and so to
carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by him to
unnecessary risk. He dealt with the passage in the Judgment of Lord
Justice Denning in the window-cleaning case of Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited,
to which I have referred. That passage reads as follows: "The next
question is whether the contractors are liable to their workman, the
plaintiff. Counsel for the contractors argued that employers who send
their men out to work on the premises of other people have no
responsibility for the safety of those premises. Be cited Taylor v. Sims & Sims
in support of that proposition. He said that it was for the occupier to
see that the premises were safe for the workman and not for the
employer to do so. I cannot agree with that proposition. Until recently
many people thought that an occupier was bound to use reasonable care
to see that his premises were safe for workmen he invited on them, but
that is no longer true. The decision of the House of Lords in London Graving Dock Company Limited v. Horton
shows that an occupier can allow his premises to remain defective and
dangerous with impunity so long as he gives the men warning that the
risk or the danger is so obvious that they must be aware of it. If this
is so, I think it must follow that it is for the employer, who sends
his men to the premises, to take reasonable care to see that the
premises are safe for the men, or else take proper steps to protect the
men from the dangers to which he sends them.

The learned Lord Justice was in effect saying that Horton's case
had left a gap which must be filled by imposing on the employer a
liability for dangers for which the invitor might no longer be liable.
The learned Judge observed that the other members of the Court of
Appeal had based their Judgments on somewhat different grounds and that
in the House of Lords the decision in the Plaintiff's favour was based
on a shortcoming in the system employed to clean the windows rather
than a failure to inspect the windows before each periodical cleaning.
He then referred to Cilia v. James & Sons and. Taylor v. Sims & Sims,
in each of which cases the learned Judges held that where an employer
sent out his men to work on the premises of others there was no duty of
care on him in respect of those premises and that, if there were, the
duty had, on the particular facts of each case, been discharged. He
also referred to Hodgson v. British Arc Welding Company Limited
(1946 King's Bench, page 302), in which Mr. Justice Hilbery dealt with
a similar point in a somewhat different and, as it seems to me, a
preferable way. The implications of his Judgment are' not that the
employers had no duty at all in respect of things over which they had
no control but that the discharge of that duty was of a wholly
different kind from that where the master was in control.

The learned Judge then continued as follows: 
"There is no evidence before
me of any practice of window cleaning employers to inspect premises in
detail before each periodical cleaning of the windows. Nor would Mr.
Davis â a surveyor called for the Plaintiff â go further than to say
that employers should go around while the work was on 'to keep an eye
on the men and see how the job was shaping'. I think it would be
placing too heavy a burden upon employers to say that they must inspect
in detail all the premises where their men clean windows every time the
men do so and before they do so. Some premises contain so many windows
that before the last window was inspected some new defect might have
developed in the first; for example, a broken sash-cord, and the work
of inspection might be endless. And without in any way minimising the
risks of the job, I think they can be met in other ways. If men are
properly taught their job; are provided with proper equipment; are
adequately warned of the dangers, and are instructed that they should
not clean any windows which appear to them to be too dangerous to
clean, but should report the matter back to the employer, then it seems
to me to be unnecessary to lay down that the employer must in addition
inspect every window beforehand".

The learned Judge then went on to deal with the case of Thomson v. Cremin
(1953 2 All England Reports, page 1185) on which the Plaintiff relied
before him and relies before us. In that case a stevedore succeeded
against a shipowner, as invitor, in respect of a faulty shoring that
injured the Plaintiff. The shoring had been installed by competent
shipwrights in Australia who were independent contractors, and a
Government certificate, had been issued to the effect that the
regulations had been duly complied with. The shipowner, on the same
reasoning as that in Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company v. English,
was held vicariously liable to an invitee for the default of the
independent contractors. The Plaintiff in this ease sought to say that
since a master owes an even higher duty to a servant than an invitor to
an invitee, then a master must a fortiori owe a duty to a
servant to see that the premises are safe before sending his workman to
work on someone else's premises. But, as the learned Judge pointed out,
this vary argument had failed in that case, since the plaintiff had
sued his master as wall as the shipowner but had failed against his
master,. The learned Judge referred to the words of Lord Simon and Lord
Wright in that case. Lord Simon said: 
"Rare, again, I agree with the
view of the Scottish courts that it was not proved to be part of the
regular practice or course of duty of stevedoring firms to make such
inspection".

The learned Judge then dealt with the duty to make
this particular handle safe, and concluded that since it was not within
the power of the Defendants to do so and they had net the necessary
control over the premises it could hardly be unreasonable not to do so.
He concluded, on this point, 
"The Defendants in fact met
the situation in this case by telling the Plaintiff, a very experienced
man, that he need clean no window which he considered unsafe. I hold
that there was no obligation upon the Defendants to go further and make
good the defective handle. The duty of an employer to take reasonable
care to provide a safe place of work relates, in my view, only to that
place of work which is in the employer's occupation or over which he is
shown to have the necessary degree of control. This is not true of the
premises in the present case".

The learned Judge then dealt with the Defendants'
alleged failure to warn the Plaintiff of that which he already knew,
namely, the danger of pulling on handles, and with the failure to give
periodically repeated warnings in order to keep his caution vigilant,
and decided that there was no negligent failure in that respect. He
commented on the fact that there was no evidence of any practice in the
trade with regard to repeated warnings. He differentiated between this
case and cases where risks are "insidious and unseen", such as
dermatitis eases, where, for instance, it might be that reminders as to
the use of barrier cream and such like precautions were necessary; and
he pointed out that in any event it was pure guesswork as to whether,
if there had been periodic warnings, this accident would have been
avoided. He found, therefore, that the Defendants had not been
negligent.

Now it is true that in Wilsons & Clyde Coal Company v. English,
Lord Wright divided up the duty of a master into three main headings,
for convenience of definition or argument; but all three are ultimately
only manifestations of the same duty of the master to take reasonable
care so to carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by
him to unnecessary risk. Whether the servant is working on the premises
of the master or those of a stranger, that duty is still, as it seems
to me, the same; but as a matter of common sense its performance and
discharge will probably be vastly different in the two cases. The
master's own premises are under his control: if they are dangerously in
need of repair he can and must rectify the fault at once if he is to
escape the censure of negligence. But if a master sends his plumber to
mend a leak in a, respectable private house, no one could hold him
negligent for not visiting the house himself to see if the carpet in
the hall creates a trap. Between those extremes are countless possible
examples in which the Court may have to decide the question of fact:
Did the master take reasonable care so to carry out his operations as
not to subject those employed by him to unnecessary risk? Precautions
dictated by reasonable care when the servant works on the master's
premises may be wholly prevented or greatly circumscribed by the fact
that the place of work is under the control of a stranger. Additional
safeguards intended to reinforce the man's own knowledge and skill in
surmounting difficulties or dangers may be reasonable in the former
case but impracticable and unreasonable in the latter, So viewed, the
question whether the master was in control of the premises ceases to be
a matter of technicality and becomes merely one of the ingredients,
albeit a very important one, in a consideration of the question of fact
whether, in all the circumstances, the master took reasonable steps.

That, as it seems to me, is the reasoning of this Court in Biddle v. Hart
(1907 1 King's Bench, page 649). In that case a stevedore's workman,
whilst engaged in unloading a ship, was injured owing to a defect in
the tackle, and he was suing his master. The learned Judge withdrew the
case from the jury, on the ground that the stevedore was not
responsible for a defect in the ship's tackle because the tackle did
not belong to him. Lord Scroll said: 
"In my opinion, if the
employer uses plant which is net his own for the purpose of doing
something which he has engaged to do, it cannot possibly be said that
he has no duty whatever in relation to that plant. Otherwise he would
be able to take anything that came from anybody and to use anything in
the work he was engaged upon without making any inquiry at all, and
then say, in the event of an injury arising from a defect in the plant,
that he had nothing to do with it, and so escape liability. That, to my
mind, is unreasonable, and is not consistent with the second section.
What I take to be the meaning of that is that if the employer uses
plant which does not belong to him, he may have a duty in regard to the
persons employed to take reasonable care to see that it is proper for
the purpose for which it is need. It may be that in a case of this
character, although he had that duty, yet, if he had dealt with these
shipowners before and had never had any cause for complaint, the jury
might think that he had reasonably discharged that duty. On the other
hand, when you have evidence that the plant was old and had been in use
for a long time, the jury might say they ware not satisfied that
reasonable care had been taken to see that it was in a proper
condition. Once establish the duty the question la, What would the jury
consider a discharge of that duty?".

As Lord Justice Parker pointed out in Davie v. New Merton Board Mills
(1958 1 All England Reports, page 67), that reasoning seems
inconsistent with the two decisions to which I have referred which say
that there is no duty of care in respect of premises over which the
master has no control, but it is consistent with the alternative ratio
in each ease that the duty had been discharged. It is consistent, I
think, with the implications of the Judgment of Mr. Justice Hilbery in Hodgson v. British Arc Welding Company Limited.
But applying that reasoning to this case, I think that the Plaintiff
has not shown that the Defendants failed to take reasonable steps for
the safety of the Plaintiff.

The learned Judge's reasoning seems to me to be
sound. It was a question of fact whether the Defendants were negligent;
and I see no ground for differing from the conclusions of fact which
the learned Judge reached.

I would dismiss the appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE PARKER: I agree.

I have no doubt that this appeal fails. It is only
out of respect for Mr. Waller's persuasive argument that I add
anything. The first way in which he puts his case is this. It is, he
says, the master's duty to provide a place of employment as safe as the
exercise of reasonable skill and cars will permit. Quite clearly, the
premises in this case where the Plaintiff was to work were not as safe
as the exercise of reasonable skill and care would permit: therefore as
the duty is personal the Defendants are liable; and that is so whether
the premises are in the occupation of the Defendants or (as here) of
people who are neither servants nor agents, nor independent contractors
employed by the Defendants.

I think that this ease is a very good example of
the difficulties that one gets into in treating the duty owed at Common
Law by a master to his servant as a number of separate duties. Thus, it
is often said (as it is said in this case) that the master owes a duty
to make the place of employment as safe as reasonable skill and care
will permit. Again, it is said that it is the master's duty to make the
plant and tools as safe as reasonable skill and care will permit; and
again it is said that it is the master's duty to devise and lay down a
safe system of working.

Approached in that way, questions at once arise as
to whether, and if so to what extent, any of those duties extend (in
the case of premises) to premises not occupied or controlled by the
master, or (in the case of plant and tools) to plant and tools bought
from responsible and reputable suppliers or manufacturers - bearing in
mind, as has been laid down so often, that in each case the duty is a
duty personal to the employer, in the sense used in Wilsons'
case. It is no doubt convenient, when one is dealing with any
particular case, to divide that duty into a number of categories; but
for myself I prefer to consider the master's duty as one applicable in
all circumstances, namely, to take reasonable care for the safety of
his men, or, as Lord Herschell said in the well-known passage in Smith v. Baker, to take reasonable care so to carry out his operations as not to subject those employed by him to unnecessary risk.

That general duty applies in the circumstances of
every case; but the governing words "reasonable care" limit the extent
of the duty in the circumstances of each case. Accordingly the duty is
there, whether the premises on which the workman is employed are in the
occupation of the master or of a third party, or whether the tool has
been made to the order of the master or his manager, servant or agent,
or is a standard tool supplied and manufactured by reputable third
parties; but what reasonable care demands in each case will no doubt
vary.

That, as it seems to me, is the true principle, and is consistent with the decision of this Court in Biddle v. Hart (1907 1 King's Bench, page 649). As I said in Davie v. New Merton Board Mills, I very much doubt whether the decisions in Taylor v. Sims & Sims and Cilia v. James & Sons
are correct decisions in so far as they said that in circumstances such
as these there is no duty in respect of the safety of the promises. It
seems to me also that those statements are inconsistent with a passage
in the Speech of Lord Wright in Thomson v. Cremin (1953 2 All England Reports, page 1185), the passage being at page 1192).

Mr. Waller relied strongly on the dicta of Lord Justice Denning in the case of Christmas v. General Cleaning Contractors Limited
(1952 1 King's Bench at Page 148); but in my judgment those were dicta,
and in so far as Mr. Waller said that those remarks implied that there
was a duty to make promises in the occupation of a third party safe I
do not think that they can stand with the decisions to which I have
referred* Bearing that in mind, it seems to me that there is nothing in
this case on which one can say that the general duty, so far as it
relates to premises, has been broken.

One can conceive cases of a very old, dilapidated
building, or a building which is known to have suffered war damage or
is dilapidated in some other respect, where one could say that it was
the duty of an employer to see that it was made safe or, if it could
not be made safe, if necessary to forbid his workmen to go there and
work. But there is no suggestion of that in the present case.

So much for Mr. Waller's first contention. His
second contention is based on an allegation that in various respects
there has been a breach of the sub-division of the duty which relates
to an unsafe system of working. I think this must be right: that in so
far as what one may call the first division, the making the premises
sage, cannot be fully performed â as when they are in the possession of
a third party, it behoves the master to exercise all the more care in
regard to his system of working.

In regard to the system of working, various points
are taken. It is said firstly that it was the duty of the master,
albeit that he could not make the premises safe, to inspect them either
each time the workmen went on the job or at any rate twice a year in
the course of a contract such as this. That, of course, overlaps to
some extent what I have already said in regard to the first contention;
but in so far as it is based on an unsafe system of working it seems to
me that the answer here is that there is no suggestion that there is
any practice in the trade in that regard. No doubt a master will
inspect the premises generally with a view to estimating for the job in
the first instance; but there is no practice in the trade whereby he
must make a periodic inspection.

Secondly, it is said that reasonable care demanded
in this case that there should be repeated warnings given to the
Plaintiff of the danger of windows sticking and of handles coming off.
In fact in the present case there not only has been no repeated
warning, but no initial warning. But the circumstances here are these:
this is a man who was 56 years of age, I think, at the time, and who
has been all his life a window cleaner: he is a very experienced man,
usually acting as a charge-hand, and he knew â and he frankly said that
he knew â of the dangers involved, of handles coming off. It is said
that he should have been told - one witness suggested that it should be
impressed upon him twice a year â again and again. For my part, I would
like to adopt entirely what Mr. Justice Donovan said on that point. It
seems to me that the disadvantages of doing that in the case of skilled
men of this sort may well outweigh the advantages; and for my part I
cannot think that "reasonable care" demands a repeated warning to
skilled man in a case at any rate such as this, where the dangers
involved are patent. It is not a case that one sometimes comes across
of the danger of silicosis from particles of dust which are quite
invisible and cannot be seen. I do not know, but it may well be that in
such cases "reasonable care" would demand that the employer should warn
and exhort the men constantly to wear masks. But there, as I have said,
the danger is not patent.

Lastly, it is said (and for my part I think that
this is the strongest way that Mr. Waller can put his case) that there
ought to have been general instructions that in the case of all sash
windows men should clean them from the inside first and, while inside,
should see that the top sash will come down - in other words, that it
is not stuck; and that in the case of a window the handles of which are
suspect it is actually opened while the men are inside. That, however,
was a suggestion made by only one witness, who I do not think had any
experience of window cleaning whatsoever. There is no suggestion that
there is any settled practice in the trade for the giving of such
instructions. Accordingly, one would have to say (adopting the words so
often used) that it would have bean folly on the part of a prudent
employer not to give such instructions. For my part, I am quite unable
to say that in that regard the Plaintiff has made out his case.

For these reasons, as well as the reasons given by my Lord, I would dismiss this appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: I entirely agree, and find nothing I can usefully add.

(Appeal dismissed: no Order as to costs save that Appellant's costs be taxed under Legal Aid and Advice Act).


]
[
LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: The judgment which is about to be read by Lord Justice Pearce is the judgment of the court in this case.

LORD JUSTICE PEARCE: The plaintiff appeals from a judgment of Mr. Justice Glyn-Jones dismissing the plaintiff's claim to rescission of an executed contract of sale on the ground of innocent misrepresentation. 

The learned judge in a clear and careful judge made findings of fact that may be summarised as follows.

Both parties carry on business as haulage contractors, the plaintiff at Sevenoaks, the defendant at Hampton Court. On Friday, 19th October, 1956,, the plaintiff read a newspaper advertisement inserted by the defendant, offering for sale at Â£850 a 1947 Dennis twelve/fourteen ton lorry described as in "exceptional condition". On the telephone that evening the defendant said to the plaintiff that it was "in first-class condition". The next day, Saturday, the plaintiff saw it at the defendant's premises. The defendant said that it was capable of forty miles per hour. The plaintiff said that he would be willing to pay Â£750 for it, if he was satisfied on a trial run, and it was agreed that on the plaintiff paying Â£5 the defendant would hold the vehicle for him until Monday. That night it was arranged on the telephone that the plaintiff might pay one half of the purchase price in cash and the remainder a few days later. The defendant repeated that it was a good vehicle. 

On Monday, the 22nd October, the plaintiff took trade plates to the defendant's premises in order to take the lorry (which was unlicensed) for a trial run on the road. The defendant made various representations as to the lorry, one of which was that it would do eleven miles to the gallon. The defendant and the plaintiff drove it in turn. The speedometer was not working, there was a wire which had to be pulled in order to decelerate since the spring was missing from the accelerator pedal, and the plaintiff had difficulty with the fifth (or top) gear. The defendant having assured the plaintiff that there was nothing wrong with the vehicle about which he had not told him, the plaintiff there and then bought the lorry for Â£750 paying a cheque of Â£370 which together with the Â£5 already paid made up half the purchase price and left a balance of Â£375 to be paid later. Before leaving, the plaintiff said: 

"If I find anything wrong your' phone won't stop ringing". 

The defendant answered:

"It's quite all right".

On Tuesday, 23rd October, a receipt, was posted to the plaintiff by the defendant,

"Received from Mr. S. E. Long the sum of Â£375 by cheque being half payment of Dennis vehicle DDW 864 as tried and approved by the above. Balance remaining Â£375."

On Wednesday, 24th October the plaintiff drove the lorry to Rochester to pick up a small load. On the journey the dynamo ceased to function and the plaintiff was advised that night to fit a reconstructed dynamo. He noticed also that an oil seal was allowing oil to escape, that there was a crack in one of the wheels, and that he had used 8 gallons of fuel for about 40 miles. 

That night he told the defendant of these defects. The defendant said that the dynamo was "all right" when the lorry left him and offered to pay half the cost of the reconstructed dynamo. This the plaintiff accepted. The defendant denied any knowledge of the broken oil seal.

The next day, Thursday, 25th October, the dynamo was fitted and the lorry was driven by the plaintiff's brother on a journey to Middlesbrough. 

On the night of Friday, 26th October, the plaintiff heard from his brother that the lorry had broken down on its journey. In consequence, the plaintiff wrote to the defendant complaining of leakage or consumption of oil from the sump, of a fuel consumption of only 9 miles per gallon instead of 11, and of the fact that instead of the lorry being a 40 mph vehicle it was an effort to keep it at 25 mph with the 4 ton load. He ended,

"The above in addition to the oil cup retainer, the rear offside spring retaining bolt, and also one cracked wheel (one to my knowledge) the dodgy accelerator, has convinced me that you have wilfully and deliberately misrepresented the state of the vehicle and under these circumstances I ask for the return of my money, and the vehicle will be returned to you by about Tuesday (I hope it lasts that long)."

He has not persisted in that charge of fraud. On 14 November the Lorry was examined by an expert who gave evidence of many serious defects which he found, sufficient, in his opinion, to make it unroadworthy.

The learned judge found that the defendant honestly made the misrepresentations complained of, that the vehicle had probably deteriorated while out of use, and that it had the defects alleged. He said this:

"The fact remains that the plaintiff was induced to buy this vehicle by material representations made to him by the defendant which, though honestly made, were untrue, and I must therefore deal with Mr. Crowther's argument that in the circumstances of this case his client is entitled to rescind the contract."

Mr. Crowther's argument is founded on the view expressed on this somewhat vexed question by Lord Justice Denning in the comparatively recent cases of Solle v Butcher 1950 1 K.B. 671 at page 695, and Leaf v International Galleries 1950 2 K.B. 86 at page 90.

That view, while accepting so far as it relates to matters of title the well-established principle that rescission of a contract for the sale of land will not be granted after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation (see Wilde v Gibson 1 H.L.C., 605, and Brownlie v Campbell 5 A.C. 925, rejects as no longer authoritative Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd 1 Ch., 326, the well-known case concerning sales of shares, in which Mr. Justice Joyce clearly stated the law to be that the court would not grant rescission of an executed contract for the sale of a chattel or chose in action on the ground of innocent misrepresentation; and involves in the like condemnation Angel v Jay 1911, 1 K.B., 666, in which the same principle was applied to an executed lease. 

The learned Lord Justice's view on this question, which has been ably and persuasively championed before us by Mr. Crowther, is thus expressed in Leaf v International Galleries (supra) at page 90:

"The observations of Mr. Justice Joyce in Sedon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. are, in my opinion, not good law. Many judges have treated it as plain that an executed contract of sale may, in a proper case, be rescinded for innocent misrepresentation: see, for instance, Lord Justice Warrington, and Lord Justice Scrutton, in T. and J. Harrison v. Knowles & Foster; per Lord Atkin in Bell v. Lever Bros. Ltd.,  per Lord Justice Scrutton and Lord Justice Maugham, in L'Estrange v. F. Graucob Ltd. Apart from that, there is now the decision of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher which overrules the first ground of decision in Angel v. Jay."

In the earlier case of Solle v Butcher (supra), Lord Justice Denning (as he was then) had said that:

"The fact that the lease has been executed is no bar to this relief. No distinction can in this respect be taken between rescission for innocent misrepresentation and rescission for common misapprehension, for many of the common misapprehensions are due to innocent misrepresentation, and Cooper v. Phibbs shows that rescission is available even after an agreement of tenancy has been executed and partly performed. The observations in Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company, Ltd., have lost all authority since Lord Justice Scrutton threw doubt on them in Lever Bros. Ltd. v. Bell and the Privy Council actually set aside an executed agreement in MacKenzie v. Royal Bank of Canada. If and in so far as Angel v. Jay decided that an executed lease could not be rescinded for an innocent misrepresentation it was, in my opinion, a wrong decision. It would mean that innocent people would be deprived of their right of rescission before they had any opportunity of knowing they had it. I am aware that in Wilde v. Gibson Lord Campbell said that an executed conveyance could be set aside only on the ground of actual fraud, but this must be taken to be confined to misrepresentations as to defects of title on the conveyance of land."

Lord Justice Denning's condemnation of Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd (supra) and Angel v Jay (supra) was by no means fully accepted by the two other members of the court in Leaf v International Galleries (supra). The Master of the Rolls (Lord Evershed) at page 93 said this:

"In the circumstances it is unnecessary, as my brethren have already observed, to express any conclusion on the more general matter whether the so-called doctrine which finds expression in the headnote to Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. ought now to be treated as of full effect and validity. The doubt on that matter is the greater since the observations of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher; but out of respect to the argument of Mr. Weitsman and because the matter is one of interest to lawyers Â I venture to add some observations which may be relevant when the general application of this doctrine has to be further consideredÂ  Finally, I add this. True it is that since the observations of Lord Justice Scrutton in Lever Bros. Ltd. v. Bell  and those of this court in Solle v. Butcher much greater doubt may be entertained about the validity of Mr. Justice Joyce's  decision in 1905. The article that Mr. Justice read to us was written eleven years ago. There has been opportunity for Parliament to alter the law if it was thought inadequate. I am not saying that that is a ground on which we should conclude that the so-called doctrine of Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. is well stated or is in all respects correct, but the fact that it has stood for such a length of time, even though qualified, is, I think, another consideration deserving of some weight when this matter has further to be debated and to be adjudicated on."

At page 91 of the report, Lord Justice Jenkins said: 

"So far as dealings in land are concerned there is a considerable body of authority to the effect that rescission on the ground of innocent misrepresentation will not be allowed after conveyance. For instance, there are the observations (1 H.L. Cas. at p. 632) of Lord Campbell to that effect in Wilde v. Gibson, and the doctrine has also been applied to leases in Angel v. Jay. In some of the cases, on the strength of the authorities dealing with sales of land, the proposition has been stated in general terms to the effect that no executed contract can be rescinded after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation. As appears from the recent decision of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher it seems probable that the proposition thus generally stated is unduly wide. In particular, it cannot be assumed that it necessarily holds good with respect to a sale of chattels passing by delivery. For the purposes of this case, however, I find it unnecessary to decide how far it is possible to obtain, on the ground of innocent misrepresentation, rescission of a contract for the sale of chattels passing by delivery after the contract has been completed by delivery of those chattels, and I propose to confine myself to considering whether, assuming such a claim to be open, this is a case in which it should properly be allowed."

The question was thus left open in Leaf v International Galleries but the court was unanimous in holding that on the assumption that the innocent misrepresentation did give rise to a right to claim rescission after the contract had been completed such right had in the circumstances of the case been lost by the time that the buyer purported to exercise it. 

Mr. Crowther's able argument has not sufficed to resolve our doubts on the question of principle, but we think that it is unnecessary here, as it was in Leaf's case, to decide whether the innocent misrepresentation relied on by the plaintiff gave rise to a right to rescission after completion of the contract, because we are satisfied that his right to do so, if it ever existed, had been lost by the time that he purported to reject the lorry.

We should next refer to the facts of Leaf's case and the observations made by the members of the court on those facts. The contract was a contract for the sale of a picture which the sellers innocently misrepresented to have been painted by Constable. The buyer took delivery of the picture and kept it for a matter of five years. He was then informed on attempting to sell the picture that it was not a Constable. Thereupon he brought his action for rescission on the ground that the sellers had misrepresented, albeit innocently, the identity of the artist. He could have claimed damages for breach of warranty but refrained from doing so. 

On these facts Lord Justice Denning after referring to sections 11(1)(c) and 35 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, said this at page 90:

"In this case this buyer took the picture into his house, and five years passed before he intimated any rejection. That, I need hardly say, is much more than a reasonable time. It is far too late for him at the end of five years to reject this picture for breach of any condition. His remedy after that length of time is for damages only, a claim which he has not brought before the court Â although rescission may in some cases be a proper remedy, nevertheless it is to be remembered that an innocent misrepresentation is much less potent than a breach of condition. A condition is a term of the contract of a most material character, and, if a claim to reject for breach of condition is barred, it seems to me a fortiori that a claim to rescission on the ground of innocent misrepresentation is also barred. So, assuming that a contract for the sale of goods may be rescinded in a proper case for innocent misrepresentation, nevertheless, once the buyer has accepted, or is deemed to have accepted, the goods, the claim is barred. In this case the buyer must clearly be deemed to have accepted the picture. He had ample opportunity to examine it in the first few days after he bought it. Then was the time to see if the condition or representation was fulfilled, yet he has kept it all this time and five years have elapsed without any notice of rejection. In my judgment, he cannot now claim to rescind Â "

Lord Justice Jenkins founded himself on the five years' delay as being far in excess of the reasonable time within which the right to claim rescission, if it ever existed, should have been exercised; and while expressing no dissent from, did not advert to, Lord Justice Denning's view to the effect that the buyer's acceptance of the picture in itself any right there might otherwise have been to claim rescission. 

The Master of the Rolls (Lord Evershed ) at page 93 said:

"I also agree that this appeal should be dismissed, for the reasons which have already been given. On the facts of this case it seems to me that the buyer ought not now to be allowed to rescind this contract Â " and a page 94 he said " If a man elects to buy a work of art or any other chattel on the faith of some representation, innocently made, and delivery of the article is accepted, then it seems to me that there is much to be said for the view that on acceptance there is an end of that particular transaction, and that, if it were otherwise, business dealings in these things would become hazardous, difficult, and uncertain."

As to the facts of the present case, Mr. Crowther contrasts the period of only a few days between the delivery of the lorry to the plaintiff and his purported rescission of the contract with the period of five years in Leaf's case. He says the plaintiff was entitled to a reasonable time within which to ascertain the true condition of the lorry and to exercise (if so advised) the right of rescission which for the present purpose he must be assumed to have had. It is of course obvious that so far as time is concerned this case bears no resemblance to Leaf's case. 

Nevertheless, a strict application to the facts of the present case of Lord Justice Denning's view to the effect that the right (if any) to rescind after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation is barred by acceptance of the goods must necessarily prove fatal to the plaintiff's case. Apart from special circumstances, the place of delivery is the proper place for examination and for acceptance. It was open to the plaintiff to have the lorry examined by an expert before driving it away but he chose not to do so. It is true, however, that the truth of certain of the representations, for example, that the lorry would do eleven miles to the gallon could not be ascertained except by user and therefore the plaintiff should have a reasonable time to test it. Until he had had such an opportunity it might well be said that he had not accepted the lorry, always assuming, of course, that he did nothing inconsistent with the ownership of the seller. An examination of the facts, however, shows that on any view he must have accepted the lorry before he purported to reject it.

Thus, to recapitulate the facts, after the trial run the plaintiff drove the lorry home from Hampton Court to Sevenoaks, a not inconsiderable distance. After that experience he took it into use in his business by driving it on the following day to Rochester and back to Sevenoaks with a load. By the time he returned from Rochester he knew that the dynamo was not charging, that there was an oil seal leaking, that he had used 8 gallons of fuel for a journey of 40 miles and that a wheel was cracked. He must also, as we think, have known by this time that the vehicle was not capable of 40 miles per hour. As to oil consumption, we should have thought that, if it was so excessive that the sump was practically dry after 300 miles, the plaintiff could have reasonably been expected to discover that the rate of consumption was unduly high by the time he had made the journey from Hampton Court to Sevenoaks and thence to Rochester and back. 

On his return from Rochester the plaintiff telephoned to the defendant and complained about the dynamo, the excessive fuel consumption, the leaking oil seal and the cracked wheel. The defendant then offered to pay half the cost of the reconstructed dynamo which the plaintiff had been advised to fit, and the plaintiff accepted the defendant's offer. We find this difficult to reconcile with the continuance of any right of rescission which the plaintiff might have had down to that time.

But the matter does not rest there. On the following day the plaintiff, knowing all that he did about the condition and performance of the lorry, despatched it, driven by his brother, on a business trip to Middlesbrough. That step, at all events, appears to us to have amounted, in all the circumstances of the case, to a final acceptance of the lorry by the plaintiff for better or for worse, and to have conclusively extinguished any right of rescission remaining to the plaintiff after completion of the sale. 

Accordingly, even if the plaintiff should be held, notwithstanding Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd, (supra), to have had a right to rescission which survived the completion of the contract, we think that on the facts of this case he lost any such right before his purported exercise of it. 

For these reasons we would dismiss this appeal.

Appeal dismissed with costs: Leave to appeal to the House of Lords granted.
]
[
LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: The judgment which is about to be read by Lord Justice Pearce is the judgment of the court in this case.

LORD JUSTICE PEARCE: The plaintiff appeals from a judgment of Mr. Justice Glyn-Jones dismissing the plaintiff's claim to rescission of an executed contract of sale on the ground of innocent misrepresentation. 

The learned judge in a clear and careful judge made findings of fact that may be summarised as follows.

Both parties carry on business as haulage contractors, the plaintiff at Sevenoaks, the defendant at Hampton Court. On Friday, 19th October, 1956,, the plaintiff read a newspaper advertisement inserted by the defendant, offering for sale at Â£850 a 1947 Dennis twelve/fourteen ton lorry described as in "exceptional condition". On the telephone that evening the defendant said to the plaintiff that it was "in first-class condition". The next day, Saturday, the plaintiff saw it at the defendant's premises. The defendant said that it was capable of forty miles per hour. The plaintiff said that he would be willing to pay Â£750 for it, if he was satisfied on a trial run, and it was agreed that on the plaintiff paying Â£5 the defendant would hold the vehicle for him until Monday. That night it was arranged on the telephone that the plaintiff might pay one half of the purchase price in cash and the remainder a few days later. The defendant repeated that it was a good vehicle. 

On Monday, the 22nd October, the plaintiff took trade plates to the defendant's premises in order to take the lorry (which was unlicensed) for a trial run on the road. The defendant made various representations as to the lorry, one of which was that it would do eleven miles to the gallon. The defendant and the plaintiff drove it in turn. The speedometer was not working, there was a wire which had to be pulled in order to decelerate since the spring was missing from the accelerator pedal, and the plaintiff had difficulty with the fifth (or top) gear. The defendant having assured the plaintiff that there was nothing wrong with the vehicle about which he had not told him, the plaintiff there and then bought the lorry for Â£750 paying a cheque of Â£370 which together with the Â£5 already paid made up half the purchase price and left a balance of Â£375 to be paid later. Before leaving, the plaintiff said: 

"If I find anything wrong your' phone won't stop ringing". 

The defendant answered:

"It's quite all right".

On Tuesday, 23rd October, a receipt, was posted to the plaintiff by the defendant,

"Received from Mr. S. E. Long the sum of Â£375 by cheque being half payment of Dennis vehicle DDW 864 as tried and approved by the above. Balance remaining Â£375."

On Wednesday, 24th October the plaintiff drove the lorry to Rochester to pick up a small load. On the journey the dynamo ceased to function and the plaintiff was advised that night to fit a reconstructed dynamo. He noticed also that an oil seal was allowing oil to escape, that there was a crack in one of the wheels, and that he had used 8 gallons of fuel for about 40 miles. 

That night he told the defendant of these defects. The defendant said that the dynamo was "all right" when the lorry left him and offered to pay half the cost of the reconstructed dynamo. This the plaintiff accepted. The defendant denied any knowledge of the broken oil seal.

The next day, Thursday, 25th October, the dynamo was fitted and the lorry was driven by the plaintiff's brother on a journey to Middlesbrough. 

On the night of Friday, 26th October, the plaintiff heard from his brother that the lorry had broken down on its journey. In consequence, the plaintiff wrote to the defendant complaining of leakage or consumption of oil from the sump, of a fuel consumption of only 9 miles per gallon instead of 11, and of the fact that instead of the lorry being a 40 mph vehicle it was an effort to keep it at 25 mph with the 4 ton load. He ended,

"The above in addition to the oil cup retainer, the rear offside spring retaining bolt, and also one cracked wheel (one to my knowledge) the dodgy accelerator, has convinced me that you have wilfully and deliberately misrepresented the state of the vehicle and under these circumstances I ask for the return of my money, and the vehicle will be returned to you by about Tuesday (I hope it lasts that long)."

He has not persisted in that charge of fraud. On 14 November the Lorry was examined by an expert who gave evidence of many serious defects which he found, sufficient, in his opinion, to make it unroadworthy.

The learned judge found that the defendant honestly made the misrepresentations complained of, that the vehicle had probably deteriorated while out of use, and that it had the defects alleged. He said this:

"The fact remains that the plaintiff was induced to buy this vehicle by material representations made to him by the defendant which, though honestly made, were untrue, and I must therefore deal with Mr. Crowther's argument that in the circumstances of this case his client is entitled to rescind the contract."

Mr. Crowther's argument is founded on the view expressed on this somewhat vexed question by Lord Justice Denning in the comparatively recent cases of Solle v Butcher 1950 1 K.B. 671 at page 695, and Leaf v International Galleries 1950 2 K.B. 86 at page 90.

That view, while accepting so far as it relates to matters of title the well-established principle that rescission of a contract for the sale of land will not be granted after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation (see Wilde v Gibson 1 H.L.C., 605, and Brownlie v Campbell 5 A.C. 925, rejects as no longer authoritative Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd 1 Ch., 326, the well-known case concerning sales of shares, in which Mr. Justice Joyce clearly stated the law to be that the court would not grant rescission of an executed contract for the sale of a chattel or chose in action on the ground of innocent misrepresentation; and involves in the like condemnation Angel v Jay 1911, 1 K.B., 666, in which the same principle was applied to an executed lease. 

The learned Lord Justice's view on this question, which has been ably and persuasively championed before us by Mr. Crowther, is thus expressed in Leaf v International Galleries (supra) at page 90:

"The observations of Mr. Justice Joyce in Sedon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. are, in my opinion, not good law. Many judges have treated it as plain that an executed contract of sale may, in a proper case, be rescinded for innocent misrepresentation: see, for instance, Lord Justice Warrington, and Lord Justice Scrutton, in T. and J. Harrison v. Knowles & Foster; per Lord Atkin in Bell v. Lever Bros. Ltd.,  per Lord Justice Scrutton and Lord Justice Maugham, in L'Estrange v. F. Graucob Ltd. Apart from that, there is now the decision of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher which overrules the first ground of decision in Angel v. Jay."

In the earlier case of Solle v Butcher (supra), Lord Justice Denning (as he was then) had said that:

"The fact that the lease has been executed is no bar to this relief. No distinction can in this respect be taken between rescission for innocent misrepresentation and rescission for common misapprehension, for many of the common misapprehensions are due to innocent misrepresentation, and Cooper v. Phibbs shows that rescission is available even after an agreement of tenancy has been executed and partly performed. The observations in Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company, Ltd., have lost all authority since Lord Justice Scrutton threw doubt on them in Lever Bros. Ltd. v. Bell and the Privy Council actually set aside an executed agreement in MacKenzie v. Royal Bank of Canada. If and in so far as Angel v. Jay decided that an executed lease could not be rescinded for an innocent misrepresentation it was, in my opinion, a wrong decision. It would mean that innocent people would be deprived of their right of rescission before they had any opportunity of knowing they had it. I am aware that in Wilde v. Gibson Lord Campbell said that an executed conveyance could be set aside only on the ground of actual fraud, but this must be taken to be confined to misrepresentations as to defects of title on the conveyance of land."

Lord Justice Denning's condemnation of Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd (supra) and Angel v Jay (supra) was by no means fully accepted by the two other members of the court in Leaf v International Galleries (supra). The Master of the Rolls (Lord Evershed) at page 93 said this:

"In the circumstances it is unnecessary, as my brethren have already observed, to express any conclusion on the more general matter whether the so-called doctrine which finds expression in the headnote to Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. ought now to be treated as of full effect and validity. The doubt on that matter is the greater since the observations of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher; but out of respect to the argument of Mr. Weitsman and because the matter is one of interest to lawyers Â I venture to add some observations which may be relevant when the general application of this doctrine has to be further consideredÂ  Finally, I add this. True it is that since the observations of Lord Justice Scrutton in Lever Bros. Ltd. v. Bell  and those of this court in Solle v. Butcher much greater doubt may be entertained about the validity of Mr. Justice Joyce's  decision in 1905. The article that Mr. Justice read to us was written eleven years ago. There has been opportunity for Parliament to alter the law if it was thought inadequate. I am not saying that that is a ground on which we should conclude that the so-called doctrine of Seddon v. North Eastern Salt Company Ltd. is well stated or is in all respects correct, but the fact that it has stood for such a length of time, even though qualified, is, I think, another consideration deserving of some weight when this matter has further to be debated and to be adjudicated on."

At page 91 of the report, Lord Justice Jenkins said: 

"So far as dealings in land are concerned there is a considerable body of authority to the effect that rescission on the ground of innocent misrepresentation will not be allowed after conveyance. For instance, there are the observations (1 H.L. Cas. at p. 632) of Lord Campbell to that effect in Wilde v. Gibson, and the doctrine has also been applied to leases in Angel v. Jay. In some of the cases, on the strength of the authorities dealing with sales of land, the proposition has been stated in general terms to the effect that no executed contract can be rescinded after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation. As appears from the recent decision of the majority of this court in Solle v. Butcher it seems probable that the proposition thus generally stated is unduly wide. In particular, it cannot be assumed that it necessarily holds good with respect to a sale of chattels passing by delivery. For the purposes of this case, however, I find it unnecessary to decide how far it is possible to obtain, on the ground of innocent misrepresentation, rescission of a contract for the sale of chattels passing by delivery after the contract has been completed by delivery of those chattels, and I propose to confine myself to considering whether, assuming such a claim to be open, this is a case in which it should properly be allowed."

The question was thus left open in Leaf v International Galleries but the court was unanimous in holding that on the assumption that the innocent misrepresentation did give rise to a right to claim rescission after the contract had been completed such right had in the circumstances of the case been lost by the time that the buyer purported to exercise it. 

Mr. Crowther's able argument has not sufficed to resolve our doubts on the question of principle, but we think that it is unnecessary here, as it was in Leaf's case, to decide whether the innocent misrepresentation relied on by the plaintiff gave rise to a right to rescission after completion of the contract, because we are satisfied that his right to do so, if it ever existed, had been lost by the time that he purported to reject the lorry.

We should next refer to the facts of Leaf's case and the observations made by the members of the court on those facts. The contract was a contract for the sale of a picture which the sellers innocently misrepresented to have been painted by Constable. The buyer took delivery of the picture and kept it for a matter of five years. He was then informed on attempting to sell the picture that it was not a Constable. Thereupon he brought his action for rescission on the ground that the sellers had misrepresented, albeit innocently, the identity of the artist. He could have claimed damages for breach of warranty but refrained from doing so. 

On these facts Lord Justice Denning after referring to sections 11(1)(c) and 35 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, said this at page 90:

"In this case this buyer took the picture into his house, and five years passed before he intimated any rejection. That, I need hardly say, is much more than a reasonable time. It is far too late for him at the end of five years to reject this picture for breach of any condition. His remedy after that length of time is for damages only, a claim which he has not brought before the court Â although rescission may in some cases be a proper remedy, nevertheless it is to be remembered that an innocent misrepresentation is much less potent than a breach of condition. A condition is a term of the contract of a most material character, and, if a claim to reject for breach of condition is barred, it seems to me a fortiori that a claim to rescission on the ground of innocent misrepresentation is also barred. So, assuming that a contract for the sale of goods may be rescinded in a proper case for innocent misrepresentation, nevertheless, once the buyer has accepted, or is deemed to have accepted, the goods, the claim is barred. In this case the buyer must clearly be deemed to have accepted the picture. He had ample opportunity to examine it in the first few days after he bought it. Then was the time to see if the condition or representation was fulfilled, yet he has kept it all this time and five years have elapsed without any notice of rejection. In my judgment, he cannot now claim to rescind Â "

Lord Justice Jenkins founded himself on the five years' delay as being far in excess of the reasonable time within which the right to claim rescission, if it ever existed, should have been exercised; and while expressing no dissent from, did not advert to, Lord Justice Denning's view to the effect that the buyer's acceptance of the picture in itself any right there might otherwise have been to claim rescission. 

The Master of the Rolls (Lord Evershed ) at page 93 said:

"I also agree that this appeal should be dismissed, for the reasons which have already been given. On the facts of this case it seems to me that the buyer ought not now to be allowed to rescind this contract Â " and a page 94 he said " If a man elects to buy a work of art or any other chattel on the faith of some representation, innocently made, and delivery of the article is accepted, then it seems to me that there is much to be said for the view that on acceptance there is an end of that particular transaction, and that, if it were otherwise, business dealings in these things would become hazardous, difficult, and uncertain."

As to the facts of the present case, Mr. Crowther contrasts the period of only a few days between the delivery of the lorry to the plaintiff and his purported rescission of the contract with the period of five years in Leaf's case. He says the plaintiff was entitled to a reasonable time within which to ascertain the true condition of the lorry and to exercise (if so advised) the right of rescission which for the present purpose he must be assumed to have had. It is of course obvious that so far as time is concerned this case bears no resemblance to Leaf's case. 

Nevertheless, a strict application to the facts of the present case of Lord Justice Denning's view to the effect that the right (if any) to rescind after completion on the ground of innocent misrepresentation is barred by acceptance of the goods must necessarily prove fatal to the plaintiff's case. Apart from special circumstances, the place of delivery is the proper place for examination and for acceptance. It was open to the plaintiff to have the lorry examined by an expert before driving it away but he chose not to do so. It is true, however, that the truth of certain of the representations, for example, that the lorry would do eleven miles to the gallon could not be ascertained except by user and therefore the plaintiff should have a reasonable time to test it. Until he had had such an opportunity it might well be said that he had not accepted the lorry, always assuming, of course, that he did nothing inconsistent with the ownership of the seller. An examination of the facts, however, shows that on any view he must have accepted the lorry before he purported to reject it.

Thus, to recapitulate the facts, after the trial run the plaintiff drove the lorry home from Hampton Court to Sevenoaks, a not inconsiderable distance. After that experience he took it into use in his business by driving it on the following day to Rochester and back to Sevenoaks with a load. By the time he returned from Rochester he knew that the dynamo was not charging, that there was an oil seal leaking, that he had used 8 gallons of fuel for a journey of 40 miles and that a wheel was cracked. He must also, as we think, have known by this time that the vehicle was not capable of 40 miles per hour. As to oil consumption, we should have thought that, if it was so excessive that the sump was practically dry after 300 miles, the plaintiff could have reasonably been expected to discover that the rate of consumption was unduly high by the time he had made the journey from Hampton Court to Sevenoaks and thence to Rochester and back. 

On his return from Rochester the plaintiff telephoned to the defendant and complained about the dynamo, the excessive fuel consumption, the leaking oil seal and the cracked wheel. The defendant then offered to pay half the cost of the reconstructed dynamo which the plaintiff had been advised to fit, and the plaintiff accepted the defendant's offer. We find this difficult to reconcile with the continuance of any right of rescission which the plaintiff might have had down to that time.

But the matter does not rest there. On the following day the plaintiff, knowing all that he did about the condition and performance of the lorry, despatched it, driven by his brother, on a business trip to Middlesbrough. That step, at all events, appears to us to have amounted, in all the circumstances of the case, to a final acceptance of the lorry by the plaintiff for better or for worse, and to have conclusively extinguished any right of rescission remaining to the plaintiff after completion of the sale. 

Accordingly, even if the plaintiff should be held, notwithstanding Seddon v North Eastern Salt Co Ltd, (supra), to have had a right to rescission which survived the completion of the contract, we think that on the facts of this case he lost any such right before his purported exercise of it. 

For these reasons we would dismiss this appeal.

Appeal dismissed with costs: Leave to appeal to the House of Lords granted.
]
[
(The Court did not call upon Mr. Harry Lester.)

LORD JUSTICE HODSON:  This is an appeal by Plaintiffs who unsuccessfully applied for an injunction.  The matter arises in this way: the Plaintiffs, who are the proprietors of the Scala Ballroom, are seeking to restrain the Defendants, who are officials of the Musicians' Union, from persuading or attempting to persuade any members of the Union not to perform at the Scala Ballroom, and from persuading or attempting to persuade any persons to refrain from employing any musicians on the ground that those musicians have played or agreed to play at the Scala Ballroom.

The ballroom was opened on 28th April 1958, by the Plaintiffs, who subsequently decided to deny admittance to coloured people. That was a course which they were entitled to adopt in their own business interests; but the reaction of the officials of the Musicians' Union was immediate as soon as the licence was granted by the licensing justices at Wolverhampton and publicity was given to that licence. The first defendant is the General Secretary of the Musicins' Union; the second defendant is the Assistant Secretary of the Union; and the third defendant is the Midland Area Organiser of the union. Some question arises in this case whether in any event the first Defendant is a party to the combination which has been alleged by the Plaintiffs, but it is unnecessary to discuss that matter further.

The second Defendant, who is, as I said, the Assistant Secretary, wrote to the Plaintiffs, saying on behalf of the union:

"Our attention has been drawn to press reports concerning your policy of racial discrimination as it will affect the clientele of your ballroom. According to these reports, coloured people are not permitted to enter the ballroom"

Then he challenged the use of the word "coloured".

The long-established policy of the Musicians' Union is strongly opposed to discrimination of any kind including, of course, racial discrimination, and, assuming the reports to be accurate, we hereby give you notice that members of the Musicians' Union will not be permitted to perform at the Scala Ballroom on any occasion so long as a policy of racial discrimination is maintained by its proprietors. Instructions are being issued accordingly, but, should you decide to abandon your policy of racial discrimination, please notify us immediately.

There were various contracts outstanding with the band leaders to perform at the ballroom. The question arose whether those contracts were being interfered with by the defendants, and on 2nd July the Plaintiffs issued their writ for damages for conspiracy and claiming an injunction restraining the Defendants from, inter alia, persuading or attempting to persuade any member of the Union not to perform at the Scala Ballroom, and with regard to existing contracts, an injunction was granted by Mr. Justice Havers on 9th July restraining the Defendants, their servants and agents, from procuring or attempting to procure any member of the Musicians' Union to break any contract to perform at the Scala Ballroom until the trial of the action or until further order. There was no appeal against that order, but the rest of the Summons was adjourned and came before Mr. Justice Diplock who refused to grant the injunction asked for, and in respect of that refusal this appeal has been brought.

This appeal calls for consideration of the law of conspiracy which was considered and very closely analysed by the House of Lords in the case of Crofter Hand Woven Harris Tweed Co Ltd v Veitch ([1942] AC 435). The claim in this case is that the Defendants have wrongly combined and conspired together to injure the plaintiffs in the way of their trade by preventing members of the union from playing at the Scala, and it has been necessary for the judges who have had to deal with this matter and for this court to consider the element of the tort of conspiracy as a civil wrong. Any decision arrived at on an application for an injunction is a provisional decision and it would be wrong to attempt to lay down in detail the law which is relevant to this case. I accept Mr. Le Quesne's submission that, if there is ia reasonable probability that he is entitled to the relief that he has claimed, this court would be ready to grant an injunction; and he submits, in support of his application, that the learned Judge's approach to this matter has not been correct. I must, therefore, refer to some extent to the Crofter case, where Lord Simon, pointed out, as indeed did Mr. Justice Diplock, that in order to make out their case Appellants "have to establish (a) agreement between the defendants (b) to effect an unlawful purpose (c) resulting in damage to the appellants. 

The learned judge has found an agreement between the defendants, and he has also found resultant damage to the appellants. I think, as I read the affidavits, that there is prima facie evidence to support his finding. In doing so, he says, they - that is the defendants - "would necessarily injure the plaintiffs in their trade. But the remaining element is the one which always gives rise to difficulty in these cases, that which is under the heading (b), namely, ?to effect an unlawful purpose.

In one of the leading cases in the House of Lords, Sorrell v Smith ([1925] A.C. 700), Lord Cave, Lord Chancellor, at pages 711 and 712, after examining three cases in their Lordships' House, extracted certain principles and formulated two propositions, namely:

(1) A combination of two or more persons wilfully to injure a man in his trade is unlawful and, if it results in damage to him, is actionable. (2) If the real purpose of the combination is, not to injure another, but to forward or defend the trade of those who enter into it, then now wrong is committed and no action will lie, although damage to another ensues.

Their Lordships pointed out that those propositions do not necessarily cover the whole ground, and are in various cases difficult to apply. It is clear from the authorities and I accept the submission of Mr. Le Quesne that it is not necessary for him to prove malevolence. He submitted that there was here a combination to do acts which necessarily resulted in injury to the Plaintiffs' trade, and he submitted further that the combination was unlawful unless the real purpose was to protect the legitimate interests of the combiners. His argument was to the effect that one could equate interests with material interests, which might be described in other words as selfish interests, and he submitted that there was no real material selfish interest of the defendants to be safeguarded here. 

In that connexion I will refer to some further language of Lord Simon. At page 444 he said:

However the origin of the rule may be explained, I take it to be clear that there are cases in which a combination of individuals to act in a certain way, resulting in deliberate damage to others, is actionable, even though the same thing, if done by a single individual without any element of combination, would not expose him to liability.

In dealing with what Mr. Le Quesne quite correctly called the legitimate interests of the Defendants, he said this:

I am content to say that, unless the real and predominant purpose is to advance the defendants' lawful interests in a matter where the defendants honestly believe that those interests would directly suffer if the action taken against the plaintiffs was not taken, a combination wilfully to damage a man in his trade is unlawful. Although most of the cases have dealt with trade rivalry in some form or other, I do not see why the proposition as to the conditions under which conspiracy becomes a tort should be limited to trade competition. Indeed, in its original sense, conspiracy as a tort was a combination to abuse legal procedure: WINFIELD, HISTORY OF CONSPIRACY, c. II. I have used the word 'directly' without seeking to define its boundaries as an indication that indirect gains, such as the subscriptions in the illustration above, would not provide a justification.

I think all their Lordships made it clear that there might be difficult cases for consideration where the interests which the defendants sought to protect were not business interests. We have been taken through a large part of the Speeches of all their Lordships and I think they all, or nearly all, touch on that aspect of the problem, and it is submitted by Mr. Le Quesne that the effect of the authority to which I have referred is that only in so far as what may be called in the narrow sense strictly material interests are concerned can the defendants say that they have lawful interests to protect.

Now, this question of a colour bar, of course, has very wide application, and it is submitted that there are no selfish or material interests for the Defendants to protect here. Their own employment is not, it is submitted on the evidence, in peril, and they are really seeking to prevent the Plaintiffs from carrying on their business in their own way by excluding from their ballroom people whom they wish to exclude. But I do not think that that is really the effect of the evidence. Mr Henry Francis Major, who was the second Defendant and was sued as Harry Francis, has sworn an affidavit in this matter, from which I quote:

A colour bar is a particularly dangerous form of discrimination in its effect on musicians since it tends to endanger their livelihood; it lowers the standards of the profession, and it creates friction in their relationship with one another. The fact that the colour bar is limited to the dancers in the 'public' dance hall and is not imposed on the musicians themselves is irrelevant because the insidious effects of the colour bar are the same. It is impossible for musicians to insulate themselves from their audience. The Musicians' Union has many coloured members some of whom are of great distinction and popularity. The feeling that they are welcome so long as they stay on the band platform, but that neither they nor their relatives would be permitted to go on to the dance floor is deplorable. In short it is considered by the Musicians' Union to be essential to the interests of its members that all manifestations of colour bar should be lawfully opposed as far as possible. The Plaintiffs recently achieved a degree of notoriety in connexion with their declared policy of excluding coloured people from their dance hall. In accordance with the declared policy of the Musicians' Union and with a view to the furtherance of the interests of its members, the third Defendant and myself sent the communications referred to in Mr. Wade's affidavit. In our view this is a trade dispute. We have no desire to injure the Plaintiffs in their business; on the contrary we wish them to prosper. The action we have taken has been directed solely to secure conditions of labour, vital to musicians. If we had done nothing, it would have appeared as though the colour bar policy of the plaintiffs was being condoned by the Musicians' Union and there would undoubtedly have been much bitterness amongst members and damage to the union.

I am not prepared, at any rate, for the purposes of this provisional opinion, to say that the interests which can lawfully be protected are confined to the material interests in the sense of interests which can be exchanged for cash. Lawful interests in my judgment may and I think do extend further than that; but, reading the affidavit, parts of which I have just read, it seems to me that prima facie, at any rate, the Defendants in this case, who represent the members of the Musicians' Union, which includes amongst its members a great many coloured people, have a lawful interest to protect in looking after their members' interests and, taking the long view, in looking after their livelihood as well. 

Therefore I would agree, therefore, that the learned Judge was right. I have not referred to the particular way in which the learned Judge put the matter himself.  It may be that he put the matter in a somewhat different way from the way in which I have put it; it may be that he was right and that his reasons are more satisfactory than mine, but at any rate, I come to the same conclusion.

Another matter was raised before the learned Judge and still remains open now, namely, the question whether the Trade Disputes Act of 1906 applies and whether the Defendants are in any event protected from any action by the provisions of that Act of Parliament. I express no opinion on that for we have not heard argument on that aspect of the case. The matter has been dealt with on the fundamental issue between the parties whether, apart altogether from the statutory defence which may be available to the Defendants, the Plaintiffs have made out a prima facie case on the merits entitling them to an injunction. I agree that they have not done so and I think therefore that this appeal should be dismissed.

LORD JUSTICE MORRIS:  I agree. 

In his speech in Crofter  Lord Simon at page 445 said this:

If the predominant purpose is the lawful protection or promotion of any lawful interest of the combiners, it is not a tortious conspiracy, even though it causes damage to another person.

Assuming for present purposes that there was an agreement between the Defendants and that what was done pursuant to such agreement has resulted or will result in damage to the Plaintiffs, the question now to be considered is whether the agreement was in order to effect an unlawful purpose. It seems to me the evidence that is before us that it appears that the real purpose the real reason of any agreement or combination was to advance the interests of the Defendants and that the proof goes beyond showing that there was merely no purpose of injuring the Plaintiffs.

Mr. Le Quesne has forcibly submitted that it should be shown that the purpose of the defendants involved some material advantage to them. If the matter is approached on that basis, then it seems to me that passages in the affidavit of Mr Francis suggest that the Defendants honestly believe that material advantage to their members is involved. But it seems to me that if the Defendants honestly believe that a certain policy is desirable and that it is the wish of their members that that policy should prevail and that there should be no colour bar discrimination, it can be said that the welfare of the members is being advanced, even though it cannot be positively translated into or shown to be reflected in detailed financial terms.

It is unnecessary at the present stage to express final and concluded opinions in regard to these matters, but in my judgment, on the material before us, it would not be appropriate that the injunction which is sought should be granted.

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  I agree. Notwithstanding the forcible and interesting argument of Mr Le Quesne, I do not think that a prima facie case has been made out and I have nothing to add to the reasons which my Lord has given.

Appeal dismissed with costs.
]
[
(The Court did not call upon Mr. Harry Lester.)

LORD JUSTICE HODSON:  This is an appeal by Plaintiffs who unsuccessfully applied for an injunction.  The matter arises in this way: the Plaintiffs, who are the proprietors of the Scala Ballroom, are seeking to restrain the Defendants, who are officials of the Musicians' Union, from persuading or attempting to persuade any members of the Union not to perform at the Scala Ballroom, and from persuading or attempting to persuade any persons to refrain from employing any musicians on the ground that those musicians have played or agreed to play at the Scala Ballroom.

The ballroom was opened on 28th April 1958, by the Plaintiffs, who subsequently decided to deny admittance to coloured people. That was a course which they were entitled to adopt in their own business interests; but the reaction of the officials of the Musicians' Union was immediate as soon as the licence was granted by the licensing justices at Wolverhampton and publicity was given to that licence. The first defendant is the General Secretary of the Musicins' Union; the second defendant is the Assistant Secretary of the Union; and the third defendant is the Midland Area Organiser of the union. Some question arises in this case whether in any event the first Defendant is a party to the combination which has been alleged by the Plaintiffs, but it is unnecessary to discuss that matter further.

The second Defendant, who is, as I said, the Assistant Secretary, wrote to the Plaintiffs, saying on behalf of the union:

"Our attention has been drawn to press reports concerning your policy of racial discrimination as it will affect the clientele of your ballroom. According to these reports, coloured people are not permitted to enter the ballroom"

Then he challenged the use of the word "coloured".

The long-established policy of the Musicians' Union is strongly opposed to discrimination of any kind including, of course, racial discrimination, and, assuming the reports to be accurate, we hereby give you notice that members of the Musicians' Union will not be permitted to perform at the Scala Ballroom on any occasion so long as a policy of racial discrimination is maintained by its proprietors. Instructions are being issued accordingly, but, should you decide to abandon your policy of racial discrimination, please notify us immediately.

There were various contracts outstanding with the band leaders to perform at the ballroom. The question arose whether those contracts were being interfered with by the defendants, and on 2nd July the Plaintiffs issued their writ for damages for conspiracy and claiming an injunction restraining the Defendants from, inter alia, persuading or attempting to persuade any member of the Union not to perform at the Scala Ballroom, and with regard to existing contracts, an injunction was granted by Mr. Justice Havers on 9th July restraining the Defendants, their servants and agents, from procuring or attempting to procure any member of the Musicians' Union to break any contract to perform at the Scala Ballroom until the trial of the action or until further order. There was no appeal against that order, but the rest of the Summons was adjourned and came before Mr. Justice Diplock who refused to grant the injunction asked for, and in respect of that refusal this appeal has been brought.

This appeal calls for consideration of the law of conspiracy which was considered and very closely analysed by the House of Lords in the case of Crofter Hand Woven Harris Tweed Co Ltd v Veitch ([1942] AC 435). The claim in this case is that the Defendants have wrongly combined and conspired together to injure the plaintiffs in the way of their trade by preventing members of the union from playing at the Scala, and it has been necessary for the judges who have had to deal with this matter and for this court to consider the element of the tort of conspiracy as a civil wrong. Any decision arrived at on an application for an injunction is a provisional decision and it would be wrong to attempt to lay down in detail the law which is relevant to this case. I accept Mr. Le Quesne's submission that, if there is ia reasonable probability that he is entitled to the relief that he has claimed, this court would be ready to grant an injunction; and he submits, in support of his application, that the learned Judge's approach to this matter has not been correct. I must, therefore, refer to some extent to the Crofter case, where Lord Simon, pointed out, as indeed did Mr. Justice Diplock, that in order to make out their case Appellants "have to establish (a) agreement between the defendants (b) to effect an unlawful purpose (c) resulting in damage to the appellants. 

The learned judge has found an agreement between the defendants, and he has also found resultant damage to the appellants. I think, as I read the affidavits, that there is prima facie evidence to support his finding. In doing so, he says, they - that is the defendants - "would necessarily injure the plaintiffs in their trade. But the remaining element is the one which always gives rise to difficulty in these cases, that which is under the heading (b), namely, ?to effect an unlawful purpose.

In one of the leading cases in the House of Lords, Sorrell v Smith ([1925] A.C. 700), Lord Cave, Lord Chancellor, at pages 711 and 712, after examining three cases in their Lordships' House, extracted certain principles and formulated two propositions, namely:

(1) A combination of two or more persons wilfully to injure a man in his trade is unlawful and, if it results in damage to him, is actionable. (2) If the real purpose of the combination is, not to injure another, but to forward or defend the trade of those who enter into it, then now wrong is committed and no action will lie, although damage to another ensues.

Their Lordships pointed out that those propositions do not necessarily cover the whole ground, and are in various cases difficult to apply. It is clear from the authorities and I accept the submission of Mr. Le Quesne that it is not necessary for him to prove malevolence. He submitted that there was here a combination to do acts which necessarily resulted in injury to the Plaintiffs' trade, and he submitted further that the combination was unlawful unless the real purpose was to protect the legitimate interests of the combiners. His argument was to the effect that one could equate interests with material interests, which might be described in other words as selfish interests, and he submitted that there was no real material selfish interest of the defendants to be safeguarded here. 

In that connexion I will refer to some further language of Lord Simon. At page 444 he said:

However the origin of the rule may be explained, I take it to be clear that there are cases in which a combination of individuals to act in a certain way, resulting in deliberate damage to others, is actionable, even though the same thing, if done by a single individual without any element of combination, would not expose him to liability.

In dealing with what Mr. Le Quesne quite correctly called the legitimate interests of the Defendants, he said this:

I am content to say that, unless the real and predominant purpose is to advance the defendants' lawful interests in a matter where the defendants honestly believe that those interests would directly suffer if the action taken against the plaintiffs was not taken, a combination wilfully to damage a man in his trade is unlawful. Although most of the cases have dealt with trade rivalry in some form or other, I do not see why the proposition as to the conditions under which conspiracy becomes a tort should be limited to trade competition. Indeed, in its original sense, conspiracy as a tort was a combination to abuse legal procedure: WINFIELD, HISTORY OF CONSPIRACY, c. II. I have used the word 'directly' without seeking to define its boundaries as an indication that indirect gains, such as the subscriptions in the illustration above, would not provide a justification.

I think all their Lordships made it clear that there might be difficult cases for consideration where the interests which the defendants sought to protect were not business interests. We have been taken through a large part of the Speeches of all their Lordships and I think they all, or nearly all, touch on that aspect of the problem, and it is submitted by Mr. Le Quesne that the effect of the authority to which I have referred is that only in so far as what may be called in the narrow sense strictly material interests are concerned can the defendants say that they have lawful interests to protect.

Now, this question of a colour bar, of course, has very wide application, and it is submitted that there are no selfish or material interests for the Defendants to protect here. Their own employment is not, it is submitted on the evidence, in peril, and they are really seeking to prevent the Plaintiffs from carrying on their business in their own way by excluding from their ballroom people whom they wish to exclude. But I do not think that that is really the effect of the evidence. Mr Henry Francis Major, who was the second Defendant and was sued as Harry Francis, has sworn an affidavit in this matter, from which I quote:

A colour bar is a particularly dangerous form of discrimination in its effect on musicians since it tends to endanger their livelihood; it lowers the standards of the profession, and it creates friction in their relationship with one another. The fact that the colour bar is limited to the dancers in the 'public' dance hall and is not imposed on the musicians themselves is irrelevant because the insidious effects of the colour bar are the same. It is impossible for musicians to insulate themselves from their audience. The Musicians' Union has many coloured members some of whom are of great distinction and popularity. The feeling that they are welcome so long as they stay on the band platform, but that neither they nor their relatives would be permitted to go on to the dance floor is deplorable. In short it is considered by the Musicians' Union to be essential to the interests of its members that all manifestations of colour bar should be lawfully opposed as far as possible. The Plaintiffs recently achieved a degree of notoriety in connexion with their declared policy of excluding coloured people from their dance hall. In accordance with the declared policy of the Musicians' Union and with a view to the furtherance of the interests of its members, the third Defendant and myself sent the communications referred to in Mr. Wade's affidavit. In our view this is a trade dispute. We have no desire to injure the Plaintiffs in their business; on the contrary we wish them to prosper. The action we have taken has been directed solely to secure conditions of labour, vital to musicians. If we had done nothing, it would have appeared as though the colour bar policy of the plaintiffs was being condoned by the Musicians' Union and there would undoubtedly have been much bitterness amongst members and damage to the union.

I am not prepared, at any rate, for the purposes of this provisional opinion, to say that the interests which can lawfully be protected are confined to the material interests in the sense of interests which can be exchanged for cash. Lawful interests in my judgment may and I think do extend further than that; but, reading the affidavit, parts of which I have just read, it seems to me that prima facie, at any rate, the Defendants in this case, who represent the members of the Musicians' Union, which includes amongst its members a great many coloured people, have a lawful interest to protect in looking after their members' interests and, taking the long view, in looking after their livelihood as well. 

Therefore I would agree, therefore, that the learned Judge was right. I have not referred to the particular way in which the learned Judge put the matter himself.  It may be that he put the matter in a somewhat different way from the way in which I have put it; it may be that he was right and that his reasons are more satisfactory than mine, but at any rate, I come to the same conclusion.

Another matter was raised before the learned Judge and still remains open now, namely, the question whether the Trade Disputes Act of 1906 applies and whether the Defendants are in any event protected from any action by the provisions of that Act of Parliament. I express no opinion on that for we have not heard argument on that aspect of the case. The matter has been dealt with on the fundamental issue between the parties whether, apart altogether from the statutory defence which may be available to the Defendants, the Plaintiffs have made out a prima facie case on the merits entitling them to an injunction. I agree that they have not done so and I think therefore that this appeal should be dismissed.

LORD JUSTICE MORRIS:  I agree. 

In his speech in Crofter  Lord Simon at page 445 said this:

If the predominant purpose is the lawful protection or promotion of any lawful interest of the combiners, it is not a tortious conspiracy, even though it causes damage to another person.

Assuming for present purposes that there was an agreement between the Defendants and that what was done pursuant to such agreement has resulted or will result in damage to the Plaintiffs, the question now to be considered is whether the agreement was in order to effect an unlawful purpose. It seems to me the evidence that is before us that it appears that the real purpose the real reason of any agreement or combination was to advance the interests of the Defendants and that the proof goes beyond showing that there was merely no purpose of injuring the Plaintiffs.

Mr. Le Quesne has forcibly submitted that it should be shown that the purpose of the defendants involved some material advantage to them. If the matter is approached on that basis, then it seems to me that passages in the affidavit of Mr Francis suggest that the Defendants honestly believe that material advantage to their members is involved. But it seems to me that if the Defendants honestly believe that a certain policy is desirable and that it is the wish of their members that that policy should prevail and that there should be no colour bar discrimination, it can be said that the welfare of the members is being advanced, even though it cannot be positively translated into or shown to be reflected in detailed financial terms.

It is unnecessary at the present stage to express final and concluded opinions in regard to these matters, but in my judgment, on the material before us, it would not be appropriate that the injunction which is sought should be granted.

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  I agree. Notwithstanding the forcible and interesting argument of Mr Le Quesne, I do not think that a prima facie case has been made out and I have nothing to add to the reasons which my Lord has given.

Appeal dismissed with costs.
]
[
 BAILII reserves the intellectual property rights
pertaining to the BAILII website's graphic and navigation design.  The
intellectual property rights in the search tools used by BAILII belong to
AustLII, whose rights are reserved.

 
 The copyright in the text of legislation and
judgments displayed on BAILII's website may belong to courts, other government
bodies, judges, and/or to commercial publishers.  BAILII cannot authorize any
copying of such material, and users of BAILII's website are referred to the
copyright policy of the relevant copyright owners.  BAILII endeavours to
indicate the existence of third party copyright on the pages of databases and
individual judgments, but users remain responsible for checking whether their
use of the materials is authorized.

 
 In the case of United Kingdom judgments
and legislation, BAILII's understanding is that Crown copyright
protected material (other than the Royal Arms and departmental or agency
logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium provided
it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context, and
provided that where any of the Crown copyright items on this site are
being republished or copied to others, the source of the material is
identified and the copyright status acknowledged.  The permission to
reproduce Crown protected material does not cover copyright held by
third parties such as commercial publishers. The copyright policy of
some other relevant third parties may be accessed using the links here
FAQ: Does it infringe copyright for
a user to copy materials and to display them on the user's own
website?.  
 Copyright in the hypertext markup of judgments
and all other presentational / value added aspects of judgments belongs to
BAILII and the authors of the software tools used, whose rights are reserved.

 
 Subject to the rights of third parties (referred
to in paragraph 2 above) and to the prohibited uses set out in paragraph 6
below, users may copy, print and distribute legal materials published on
BAILII's website free of charge and without any other authorization from BAILII,
provided that BAILII is identified as the source of the document.
 
Prohibited Uses

(a) incorporating search results or HTML versions of 
judgments into another website or into the output of a computer program 
not provided by BAILII itself (including apps or other programs used on 
a hand-held device or tablet computer);
(b) storing search results or HTML versions of 
judgments
 (c) external indexing of documents by web robots or 
spiders when such use is not authorized by the instructions in the 
robots exclusion file at https://www.bailii.org/robots.txt
  or in a META tag in the HTML code of a published document, in 
compliance with the Robots Exclusion 
Protocol;
(d) abusive use of the BAILII website's resources and 
services via automated mechanisms or otherwise, in particular for bulk 
downloading of documents.
BAILII reserves the right to block, at
its discretion and without prior notice, any user from accessing its 
website if it believes that the user has misused the website or has 
used it for unlawful purposes. BAILII monitors the use of automated 
mechanisms to access its website, and its policy is to block entire 
domains which use such mechanisms without authorisation, until a proper 
explanation is provided.

 
 BAILII has no objection to links from
other websites to material on BAILII's website, and encourages this
practice.  Further information is available here. 
 
]
[]
[]
[]
